anarchism is a political philosophy and movement that rejects all involuntary, coercive forms of hierarchy.
it calls for the abolition of the state which it holds to be undesirable, unnecessary and harmful.
the history of anarchism goes back to prehistory, when some humans lived in anarchistic societies long before the establishment of formal states, realms or empires.
with the rise of organised hierarchical bodies, scepticism toward authority also rose, but it was not until the 19th century that a self-conscious political movement emerged.
various anarchist schools of thought formed during this period.
anarchists have taken part in several revolutions, most notably in the spanish civil war, whose end marked the end of the classical era of anarchism.
in the last decades of the 20th century and into the 21st century, the anarchist movement has been resurgent once more.
anarchism employs various tactics in order to meet its ideal ends which can be broadly separated into revolutionary and evolutionary tactics.
there is significant overlap between the two which are merely descriptive.
revolutionary tactics aim to bring down authority and state, having taken a violent turn in the past.
evolutionary tactics aim to prefigure what an anarchist society would be like.
anarchist thought, criticism and praxis have played a part in diverse areas of human society.
criticism of anarchism mainly focuses on claims of it being internally inconsistent, violent and utopian.
"without") and the word "arkhos" (i.e.
"leader" or "ruler").
the suffix "-ism" denotes the ideological current that favours anarchy.
"anarchism" appears in english from 1642 as "anarchisme" and "anarchy" from 1539.
various factions within the french revolution labelled their opponents as "anarchists", although few such accused shared many views with later anarchists.
on the other hand, some use "libertarianism" to refer to individualistic free-market philosophy only, referring to free-market anarchism as "libertarian anarchism".
additionally, some anarchists use "libertarian socialist" to avoid anarchism's negative connotations and emphasise its connections with socialism.
matthew s. adams and carl levy write that "anarchism" is used to "describe the anti-authoritarian wing of the socialist movement".
similarly, noam chomsky describes anarchism, alongside libertarian marxism, as "the libertarian wing of socialism".
daniel guérin wrote: [a]narchism is really a synonym for socialism.
the anarchist is primarily a socialist whose aim is to abolish the exploitation of man by man.
anarchism is only one of the streams of socialist thought, that stream whose main components are concern for liberty and haste to abolish the state.
herbert l. osgood claimed that anarchism is "the extreme antithesis" of authoritarian communism and state socialism.
peter marshall states that "[i]n general anarchism is closer to socialism than liberalism.
[...] anarchism finds itself largely in the socialist camp, but it also has outriders in liberalism.
it cannot be reduced to socialism, and is best seen as a separate and distinctive doctrine".
nicolas walter wrote that "anarchism does derive from liberalism and socialism both historically and ideologically.
[...] in a sense, anarchists always remain liberals and socialists, and whenever they reject what is good in either they betray anarchism itself.
[...] we are liberals but more so, and socialists but more so".
michael newman includes anarchism as one of many socialist traditions, especially the more socialist-aligned tradition following proudhon and mikhail bakunin.
brian morriss argues that it is "conceptually and historically misleading" to "create a dichotomy between socialism and anarchism".
during the prehistoric era of mankind, an established authority did not exist.
it was after the creation of towns and cities that institutions of authority were established and anarchistic ideas espoused as a reaction.
most notable precursors to anarchism in the ancient world were in china and greece.
in china, philosophical anarchism (i.e.
the discussion on the legitimacy of the state) was delineated by taoist philosophers zhuang zhou and laozi.
anarchic attitudes were also articulated by tragedians and philosophers in greece.
aeschylus and sophocles used the myth of antigone to illustrate the conflict between rules set by the state and personal autonomy.
socrates questioned athenian authorities constantly and insisted on the right of individual freedom of conscience.
cynics dismissed human law ("nomos") and associated authorities while trying to live according to nature ("physis").
stoics were supportive of a society based on unofficial and friendly relations among its citizens without the presence of a state.
during the middle ages, there was no anarchistic activity except some ascetic religious movements in the muslim world or in christian europe.
this kind of tradition later gave birth to religious anarchism.
in the sasanian empire, mazdak called for an egalitarian society and the abolition of monarchy, only to be soon executed by emperor kavad i.
in basra, religious sects preached against the state.
in europe, various sects developed anti-state and libertarian tendencies.
libertarian ideas further emerged during the renaissance with the spread of humanism, rationalism and reasoning through europe.
novelists fictionalised ideal societies that were based on voluntarism rather than coercion.
the age of enlightenment further pushed towards anarchism with the optimism for social progress.
during the french revolution, partisan groups such as the enragés and the saw a turning point in the fermentation of anti-state and federalist sentiments.
this era of classical anarchism lasted until the end of the spanish civil war and is considered the golden age of anarchism.
the international became a significant political force, with karl marx being a leading figure and a member of its general council.
bakunin's faction (the jura federation) and proudhon's followers (the mutualists) opposed state socialism, advocating political abstentionism and small property holdings.
after bitter disputes, the bakuninists were expelled from the international by the marxists at the 1872 hague congress.
bakunin famously predicted that if revolutionaries gained power by marx's terms, they would end up the new tyrants of workers.
after being expelled, anarchists formed the st. imier international.
under the influence of peter kropotkin, a russian philosopher and scientist, anarcho-communism overlapped with collectivism.
anarcho-communists, who drew inspiration from the 1871 paris commune, advocated for free federation and for the distribution of goods according to one's needs.
at the turn of the century, anarchism had spread all over the world.
in china, small groups of students imported the humanistic pro-science version of anarcho-communism.
tokyo was a hotspot for rebellious youth from countries of the far east, travelling to the japanese capital to study.
in latin america, argentina was a stronghold for anarcho-syndicalism, where it became the most prominent left-wing ideology.
during this time, a minority of anarchists adopted tactics of revolutionary political violence.
this strategy became known as propaganda of the deed.
even though many anarchists distanced themselves from these terrorist acts, infamy came upon the movement.
illegalism was another strategy which some anarchists adopted during this period.
despite concerns, anarchists enthusiastically participated in the russian revolution in opposition to the white movement.
however, they met harsh suppression after the bolshevik government was stabilized.
several anarchists from petrograd and moscow fled to ukraine, notably leading to the kronstadt rebellion and nestor makhno's struggle in the free territory.
with the anarchists being crushed in russia, two new antithetical currents emerged, namely platformism and synthesis anarchism.
the former sought to create a coherent group that would push for revolution while the latter were against anything that would resemble a political party.
in the spanish civil war of 1936, anarchists and syndicalists (cnt and fai) once again allied themselves with various currents of leftists.
a long tradition of spanish anarchism led to anarchists playing a pivotal role in the war.
at the end of world war ii, the anarchist movement was severely weakened.
however, the 1960s witnessed a revival of anarchism, likely caused by a perceived failure of marxism–leninism and tensions built by the cold war.
anarchism became associated with punk subculture as exemplified by bands such as crass and the sex pistols.
the established feminist tendencies of anarcha-feminism returned with vigour during the second wave of feminism.
around the turn of the 21st century, anarchism grew in popularity and influence within anti-capitalist, anti-war and anti-globalisation movements.
anarchists became known for their involvement in protests against the world trade organization (wto), the group of eight and the world economic forum.
during the protests, "ad hoc" leaderless anonymous cadres known as black blocs engaged in rioting, property destruction and violent confrontations with the police.
other organisational tactics pioneered in this time include affinity groups, security culture and the use of decentralised technologies such as the internet.
a significant event of this period was the confrontations at the 1999 seattle wto conference.
anarchism pays significant attention to moral arguments since ethics have a central role in anarchist philosophy.
anarchism's emphasis on anti-capitalism, egalitarianism and for the extension of community and individuality sets it apart from anarcho-capitalism and other types of economic libertarianism.
anarchism is usually placed on the far-left of the political spectrum.
as anarchism does not offer a fixed body of doctrine from a single particular worldview, many anarchist types and traditions exist and varieties of anarchy diverge widely.
despite separation, the various anarchist schools of thought are not seen as distinct entities, but rather as tendencies that intermingle.
inceptive currents among classical anarchist currents were mutualism and individualism.
they were followed by the major currents of social anarchism (collectivist, communist and syndicalist).
they differ on organizational and economic aspects of their ideal society.
mutualism is an 18th-century economic theory that was developed into anarchist theory by pierre-joseph proudhon.
mutualism has been retrospectively characterised as ideologically situated between individualist and collectivist forms of anarchism.
in "what is property?"
(1840), proudhon first characterised his goal as a "third form of society, the synthesis of communism and property".
collectivist anarchism is a revolutionary socialist form of anarchism commonly associated with mikhail bakunin.
collectivist anarchism arose alongside marxism, but it rejected the dictatorship of the proletariat despite the stated marxist goal of a collectivist stateless society.
anarcho-communism developed from radical socialist currents after the french revolution, but it was first formulated as such in the italian section of the first international.
it was later expanded upon in the theoretical work of peter kropotkin.
the basic principles of anarcho-syndicalism are direct action, workers' solidarity and workers' self-management.
individualist anarchism is a set of several traditions of thought within the anarchist movement that emphasise the individual and their will over any kinds of external determinants.
early influences on individualist forms of anarchism include william godwin, max stirner and henry david thoreau.
anarchist principles undergird contemporary radical social movements of the left.
interest in the anarchist movement developed alongside momentum in the anti-globalisation movement, whose leading activist networks were anarchist in orientation.
as the movement shaped 21st century radicalism, wider embrace of anarchist principles signaled a revival of interest.
the anti-capitalist tradition of classical anarchism has remained prominent within contemporary currents.
various anarchist groups, tendencies, and schools of thought exist today, making it difficult to describe the contemporary anarchist movement.
gender equality can be a common principle, although it ranks as a higher priority to anarcha-feminists than anarchist communists.
), economic class systems (e.g., capitalism, bolshevism, feudalism, slavery, etc.
), autocratic religions (e.g., fundamentalist islam, roman catholicism, etc.
), patriarchy, heterosexism, white supremacy, and imperialism".
however, anarchist schools disagree on the methods by which these forms should be opposed.
evolutionary tactics embrace nonviolence, reject violence and take a gradual approach to anarchist aims, although there is significant overlap between the two.
anarchist tactics have shifted during the course of the last century.
anarchists during the early 20th century focused more on strikes and militancy while contemporary anarchists use a broader array of approaches.
during the classical era, anarchists had a militant tendency.
not only did they confront state armed forces (as in spain and ukraine) but some of them also employed terrorism as propaganda of the deed.
assassination attempts were carried out against heads of state, some of which were successful.
anarchists also took part in revolutions.
anarchist perspectives towards violence have always been perplexing and controversial.
on one hand, anarcho-pacifists point out the unity of means and ends.
on the other hand, other anarchist groups advocate direct action, a tactic which can include acts of sabotage or even acts of terrorism.
anarchists took an active role in strike actions, although they tended to be antipathetic to formal syndicalism, seeing it as reformist.
they saw it as a part of the movement which sought to overthrow the state and capitalism.
anarchists also reinforced their propaganda within the arts, some of whom practiced naturism and nudism.
those anarchists also built communities which were based on friendship and were involved in the news media.
members of the invisible committee were arrested in 2008 on various charges, terrorism included.
overall, today's anarchists are much less violent and militant than their ideological ancestors.
they mostly engage in confronting the police during demonstrations and riots, especially in countries such as canada, greece and mexico.
μilitant black bloc protest groups are known for clashing with the police.
anarchists commonly employ direct action.
decision-making is often handled in an anti-authoritarian way, with everyone having equal say in each decision, an approach known as horizontalism.
those anarchists would rather base their thought and praxis on their own experience which they will later theorize.
the decision-making process of small anarchist affinity groups plays a significant tactical role.
anarchists have employed various methods in order to build a rough consensus among members of their group without the need of a leader or a leading group.
minorities usually accept rough consensus, except when they feel the proposal contradicts anarchist ethics, goals and values.
anarchists usually form small groups (5–20 individuals) to enhance autonomy and friendships among their members.
these kinds of groups more often than not interconnect with each other, forming larger networks.
anarchists still support and participate in strikes, especially wildcat strikes as these are leaderless strikes not organised centrally by a syndicate.
as in the past, newspapers and journals are used, but anarchists have gone online in the world wide web to spread their message.
however, anarchists have found it easier to create websites because of distributional and other difficulties, hosting electronic libraries and other portals.
anarchists were also involved in developing various software that are available for free.
the way these hacktivists work to develop and distribute resembles the anarchist ideals, especially when it comes to preserving users' privacy from state surveillance.
anarchists organize themselves to squat and reclaim public spaces.
as seen by anarchists, squatting is a way to regain urban space from the capitalist market, serving pragmatical needs and also being an exemplary direct action.
acquiring space enables anarchists to experiment with their ideas and build social bonds.
as anarchism is a philosophy that embodies many diverse attitudes, tendencies, schools of thought, disagreement over questions of values, ideology and tactics is common.
its diversity has led to widely different uses of identical terms among different anarchist traditions which has created a number of definitional concerns in anarchist theory.
the compatibility of capitalism, nationalism and religion with anarchism is widely disputed.
similarly, anarchism enjoys complex relationships with ideologies such as communism, collectivism, marxism and trade unionism.
anarchists may be motivated by humanism, divine authority, enlightened self-interest, veganism, or any number of alternative ethical doctrines.
phenomena such as civilisation, technology (e.g.
within anarcho-primitivism) and the democratic process may be sharply criticised within some anarchist tendencies and simultaneously lauded in others.
a historical current that arose and flourished during 1890 and 1920 within anarchism was free love.
in contemporary anarchism, this current survives as a tendency to support polyamory and queer anarchism.
the notion of free love was much broader and included a critique of the established order that limited women's sexual freedom and pleasure.
those free love movements contributed to the establishment of communal houses, where large groups of travelers, anarchists and other activists slept in beds together.
free love had roots both in europe and the united states.
however, some anarchists struggled with the jealousy that arose from free love.
anarchist feminists were advocates of free love, against marriage, pro-choice (utilising a contemporary term) and had a similar agenda.
anarchist and non-anarchist feminists differed on suffrage, but they were nonetheless supportive of one another.
with the third wave of feminism, sexual identity and compulsory heterosexuality became a subject of study for anarchists, yielding a post-structuralist critique of sexual normality.
however, some anarchists distanced themselves from this line of thinking, suggesting that it leaned towards an individualism that was dropping the cause of social liberation.
the interest of anarchists in education stretches back to the first emergence of classical anarchism.
anarchists consider proper education, one which sets the foundations of the future autonomy of the individual and the society, to be an act of mutual aid.
ferrer aimed to educate the working class and explicitly sought to foster class consciousness among students.
the school closed after constant harassment by the state and ferrer was later arrested.
nonetheless, his ideas formed the inspiration for a series of modern schools around the world.
in a similar token, a. s. neill founded what became the summerhill school in 1921, also declaring being free from coercion.
however, there has been little consensus among anarchist figures as to what constitutes manipulation.
contemporary anarchists such as ward have further argued that state education serves to perpetuate socio-economic inequality.
objection to the state and its institutions is a "sine qua non" of anarchism.
anarchists consider the state as a tool of domination and believe it to be illegitimate regardless of its political tendencies.
instead of people being able to control the aspects of their life, major decisions are taken by a small elite.
authority ultimately rests solely on power, regardless of whether that power is open or transparent, as it still has the ability to coerce people.
in literature, anarchism was mostly associated with the new apocalyptics and the neo-romanticism movement.
in music, anarchism has been associated with music scenes such as punk.
other anarchists advocated for or used art as a means to achieve anarchist ends.
three overlapping properties made art useful to anarchists.
as it appeals to both emotion and reason, art could appeal to the whole human and have a powerful effect.
the 19th-century neo-impressionist movement had an ecological aesthetic and offered an example of an anarchist perception of the road towards socialism.
in "les chataigniers a osny" by anarchist painter camille pissarro, the blending of aestetic and social harmony is prefiguring an ideal anarchistic agrarian community.
the most common critique of anarchism is that humans can not self govern and a state is necessary for human survival.
philosophy lecturer andrew g. fiala also believed that humans could not self govern and included it in his list of arguments against anarchism.
fiala's other critiques were that anarchism is innately related to violence and destruction, not only in the pragmatic world, i.e.
at protests, but in the world of ethics as well.
secondly, anarchism is evaluated as unfeasible or utopian since the state can not be defeated practically.
this line of arguments most often calls for political action within the system to reform it.
the third argument is that anarchism is self-contradictory.
while it advocates for no-one to "archiei", if accepted by the many, then anarchism would turn into the ruling political theory.
lastly, fiala mentions a critique towards philosophical anarchism of being ineffective (all talk and thoughts) and in the meantime capitalism and bourgeois class remains strong.
in an 1886 article for the "north american review", frances l. ferguson argued that anarchism defies and fails to understand the biological inclination to authority.
law professor william a. edmundson authored an essay arguing against three major philosophical anarchist principles which he finds fallacious.
philosophical and political anarchism] are philosophical and political claims".
autism is a developmental disorder characterized by difficulties with social interaction and communication, and by restricted and repetitive behavior.
parents often notice signs during the first three years of their child's life.
these signs often develop gradually, though some children with autism experience worsening in their communication and social skills after reaching developmental milestones at a normal pace.
autism is associated with a combination of genetic and environmental factors.
controversies surround other proposed environmental causes; for example, the vaccine hypothesis, which has been disproven.
autism affects information processing in the brain and how nerve cells and their synapses connect and organize; how this occurs is not well understood.
early behavioral interventions or speech therapy can help children with autism gain self-care, social, and communication skills.
although there is no known cure, there have been cases of children who recovered.
some autistic adults are unable to live independently.
an autistic culture has developed, with some individuals seeking a cure and others believing autism should be accepted as a difference to be accommodated instead of cured.
globally, autism is estimated to affect 24.8 million people .
in the 2000s, the number of people affected was estimated at 1–2 per 1,000 people worldwide.
in the developed countries, about 1.5% of children are diagnosed with asd , from 0.7% in 2000 in the united states.
it occurs four-to-five times more often in males than females.
the number of people diagnosed has increased dramatically since the 1960s, which may be partly due to changes in diagnostic practice.
the question of whether actual rates have increased is unresolved.
autism is a highly variable, neurodevelopmental disorder whose symptoms first appear during infancy or childhood, and generally follows a steady course without remission.
people with autism may be severely impaired in some respects but average, or even superior, in others.
it is distinguished by a characteristic triad of symptoms: impairments in social interaction, impairments in communication, and repetitive behavior.
other aspects, such as atypical eating, are also common but are not essential for diagnosis.
individual symptoms of autism occur in the general population and appear not to associate highly, without a sharp line separating pathologically severe from common traits.
social deficits distinguish autism and the related autism spectrum disorders (asd; see classification) from other developmental disorders.
people with autism have social impairments and often lack the intuition about others that many people take for granted.
unusual social development becomes apparent early in childhood.
autistic infants show less attention to social stimuli, smile and look at others less often, and respond less to their own name.
however, they do form attachments to their primary caregivers.
most children with autism display moderately less attachment security than neurotypical children, although this difference disappears in children with higher mental development or less pronounced autistic traits.
children with high-functioning autism have more intense and frequent loneliness compared to non-autistic peers, despite the common belief that children with autism prefer to be alone.
making and maintaining friendships often proves to be difficult for those with autism.
for them, the quality of friendships, not the number of friends, predicts how lonely they feel.
functional friendships, such as those resulting in invitations to parties, may affect the quality of life more deeply.
there are many anecdotal reports, but few systematic studies, of aggression and violence in individuals with asd.
the limited data suggest that, in children with intellectual disability, autism is associated with aggression, destruction of property, and meltdowns.
about a third to a half of individuals with autism do not develop enough natural speech to meet their daily communication needs.
joint attention seems to be necessary for functional speech, and deficits in joint attention seem to distinguish infants with asd.
children with autism may have difficulty with imaginative play and with developing symbols into language.
both autistic groups performed worse than controls at complex language tasks such as figurative language, comprehension and inference.
autistic individuals can display many forms of repetitive or restricted behavior, which the repetitive behavior scale-revised (rbs-r) categorizes as follows.
no single repetitive or self-injurious behavior seems to be specific to autism, but autism appears to have an elevated pattern of occurrence and severity of these behaviors.
autistic individuals may have symptoms that are independent of the diagnosis, but that can affect the individual or the family.
many individuals with asd show superior skills in perception and attention, relative to the general population.
unusual eating behavior occurs in about three-quarters of children with asd, to the extent that it was formerly a diagnostic indicator.
selectivity is the most common problem, although eating rituals and food refusal also occur.
there is tentative evidence that autism occurs more frequently in people with gender dysphoria.
gastrointestinal problems are one of the most commonly associated medical disorders in people with autism.
these are linked to greater social impairment, irritability, behavior and sleep problems, language impairments and mood changes.
parents of children with asd have higher levels of stress.
it has long been presumed that there is a common cause at the genetic, cognitive, and neural levels for autism's characteristic triad of symptoms.
however, there is increasing suspicion that autism is instead a complex disorder whose core aspects have distinct causes that often co-occur.
complexity arises due to interactions among multiple genes, the environment, and epigenetic factors which do not change dna sequencing but are heritable and influence gene expression.
many genes have been associated with autism through sequencing the genomes of affected individuals and their parents.
however, most of the mutations that increase autism risk have not been identified.
numerous candidate genes have been located, with only small effects attributable to any particular gene.
most loci individually explain less than 1% of cases of autism.
the large number of autistic individuals with unaffected family members may result from spontaneous structural variation—such as deletions, duplications or inversions in genetic material during meiosis.
maternal nutrition and inflammation during preconception and pregnancy influences fetal neurodevelopment.
intrauterine growth restriction is associated with asd, in both term and preterm infants.
maternal inflammatory and autoimmune diseases may damage fetal tissues, aggravating a genetic problem or damaging the nervous system.
exposure to air pollution during pregnancy, especially heavy metals and particulates, may increase the risk of autism.
some, such as the mmr vaccine, have been completely disproven.
parents may first become aware of autistic symptoms in their child around the time of a routine vaccination.
this has led to unsupported theories blaming vaccine "overload", a vaccine preservative, or the mmr vaccine for causing autism.
the latter theory was supported by a litigation-funded study that has since been shown to have been "an elaborate fraud".
autism's symptoms result from maturation-related changes in various systems of the brain.
how autism occurs is not well understood.
the behaviors appear to have multiple pathophysiologies.
there is evidence that gut–brain axis abnormalities may be involved.
a 2016 review concludes that enteric nervous system abnormalities might play a role in neurological disorders such as autism.
neural connections and the immune system are a pathway that may allow diseases originated in the intestine to spread to the brain.
several lines of evidence point to synaptic dysfunction as a cause of autism.
some rare mutations may lead to autism by disrupting some synaptic pathways, such as those involved with cell adhesion.
gene replacement studies in mice suggest that autistic symptoms are closely related to later developmental steps that depend on activity in synapses and on activity-dependent changes.
diagnosis is based on behavior, not cause or mechanism.
these deficits are present in early childhood, typically before age three, and lead to clinically significant functional impairment.
sample symptoms include lack of social or emotional reciprocity, stereotyped and repetitive use of language or idiosyncratic language, and persistent preoccupation with unusual objects.
the disturbance must not be better accounted for by rett syndrome, intellectual disability or global developmental delay.
icd-10 uses essentially the same definition.
several diagnostic instruments are available.
the childhood autism rating scale (cars) is used widely in clinical environments to assess severity of autism based on observation of children.
the diagnostic interview for social and communication disorders (disco) may also be used.
a pediatrician commonly performs a preliminary investigation by taking developmental history and physically examining the child.
a pediatric neuropsychologist is often asked to assess behavior and cognitive skills, both to aid diagnosis and to help recommend educational interventions.
a differential diagnosis for asd at this stage might also consider intellectual disability, hearing impairment, and a specific language impairment such as landau–kleffner syndrome.
the presence of autism can make it harder to diagnose coexisting psychiatric disorders such as depression.
clinical genetics evaluations are often done once asd is diagnosed, particularly when other symptoms already suggest a genetic cause.
a genotype-first model of diagnosis has been proposed, which would routinely assess the genome's copy number variations.
as new genetic tests are developed several ethical, legal, and social issues will emerge.
commercial availability of tests may precede adequate understanding of how to use test results, given the complexity of autism's genetics.
metabolic and neuroimaging tests are sometimes helpful, but are not routine.
girls are often diagnosed later than boys.
conversely, the cost of screening and diagnosis and the challenge of obtaining payment can inhibit or delay diagnosis.
these symptoms do not imply sickness, fragility, or emotional disturbance.
unlike with autism, people with asperger syndrome have no substantial delay in language development.
it has been proposed to classify autism using genetics as well as behavior.
because the behavior spectrum is continuous, boundaries between diagnostic categories are necessarily somewhat arbitrary.
sometimes the syndrome is divided into low-, medium- or high-functioning autism (lfa, mfa, and hfa), based on iq thresholds.
about half of parents of children with asd notice their child's unusual behaviors by age 18 months, and about four-fifths notice by age 24 months.
according to an article, failure to meet any of the following milestones "is an absolute indication to proceed with further evaluations.
delay in referral for such testing may delay early diagnosis and treatment and affect the long-term outcome".
the united states preventive services task force in 2016 found it was unclear if screening was beneficial or harmful among children in whom there is no concerns.
the japanese practice is to screen all children for asd at 18 and 24 months, using autism-specific formal screening tests.
in contrast, in the uk, children whose families or doctors recognize possible signs of autism are screened.
it is not known which approach is more effective.
it may be more accurate to precede these tests with a broadband screener that does not distinguish asd from other developmental disorders.
screening tools designed for one culture's norms for behaviors like eye contact may be inappropriate for a different culture.
although genetic screening for autism is generally still impractical, it can be considered in some cases, such as children with neurological symptoms and dysmorphic features.
while infection with rubella during pregnancy causes fewer than 1% of cases of autism, vaccination against rubella can prevent many of those cases.
the main goals when treating children with autism are to lessen associated deficits and family distress, and to increase quality of life and functional independence.
in general, higher iqs are correlated with greater responsiveness to treatment and improved treatment outcomes.
no single treatment is best and treatment is typically tailored to the child's needs.
families and the educational system are the main resources for treatment.
services should be carried out by behavior analysts, special education teachers, speech pathologists, and licensed psychologists.
studies of interventions have methodological problems that prevent definitive conclusions about efficacy.
however, the development of evidence-based interventions has advanced in recent years.
among these approaches, interventions either treat autistic features comprehensively, or focalize treatment on a specific area of deficit.
two theoretical frameworks outlined for early childhood intervention include structured and naturalistic aba interventions, and developmental social pragmatic models (dsp).
one interventional strategy utilizes a parent training model, which teaches parents how to implement various aba and dsp techniques, allowing for parents to disseminate interventions themselves.
various dsp programs have been developed to explicitly deliver intervention systems through at-home parent implementation.
despite the recent development of parent training models, these interventions have demonstrated effectiveness in numerous studies, being evaluated as a probable efficacious mode of treatment.
neuropsychological reports are often poorly communicated to educators, resulting in a gap between what a report recommends and what education is provided.
the appropriateness of including children with varying severity of autism spectrum disorders in the general education population is a subject of current debate among educators and researchers.
medications may be used to treat asd symptoms that interfere with integrating a child into home or school when behavioral treatment fails.
they may also be used for associated health problems, such as adhd or anxiety.
the atypical antipsychotic drugs risperidone and aripiprazole are fda-approved for treating associated aggressive and self-injurious behaviors.
however, their side effects must be weighed against their potential benefits, and people with autism may respond atypically.
side effects, for example, may include weight gain, tiredness, drooling, and aggression.
there is scant reliable research about the effectiveness or safety of drug treatments for adolescents and adults with asd.
no known medication relieves autism's core symptoms of social and communication impairments.
although many alternative therapies and interventions are available, few are supported by scientific studies.
treatment approaches have little empirical support in quality-of-life contexts, and many programs focus on success measures that lack predictive validity and real-world relevance.
some alternative treatments may place the child at risk.
in 2005, botched chelation therapy killed a five-year-old child with autism.
chelation is not recommended for people with asd since the associated risks outweigh any potential benefits.
another alternative medicine practice with no evidence is cease therapy, a mixture of homeopathy, supplements, and 'vaccine detoxing'.
the authors analyzed the prospective trials conducted to date that studied the efficacy of the gluten- and casein-free diet in children with asd (4 in total).
in two of the studies, whose duration was 12 and 24 months, a significant improvement in asd symptoms (efficacy rate 50%) was identified.
in the other two studies, whose duration was 3 months, no significant effect was observed.
the authors concluded that a longer duration of the diet may be necessary to achieve the improvement of the asd symptoms.
in the subset of people who have gluten sensitivity there is limited evidence that suggests that a gluten-free diet may improve some autistic behaviors.
results of a systematic review on interventions to address health outcomes among autistic adults found emerging evidence to support mindfulness-based interventions for improving mental health.
this includes decreasing stress, anxiety, ruminating thoughts, anger, and aggression.
there is tentative evidence that music therapy may improve social interactions, verbal communication, and non-verbal communication skills.
there has been early research looking at hyperbaric treatments in children with autism.
studies on pet therapy have shown positive effects.
there is no known cure.
the degree of symptoms can decrease, occasionally to the extent that people lose their diagnosis of asd; this occurs sometimes after intensive treatment and sometimes not.
it is not known how often this outcome happens; reported rates in unselected samples have ranged from 3% to 25%.
most children with autism acquire language by age five or younger, though a few have developed communication skills in later years.
many children with autism lack social support, future employment opportunities or self-determination.
although core difficulties tend to persist, symptoms often become less severe with age.
few high-quality studies address long-term prognosis.
some adults show modest improvement in communication skills, but a few decline; no study has focused on autism after midlife.
many individuals with autism face significant obstacles in transitioning to adulthood.
compared to the general population individuals with autism are more likely to be unemployed and to have never had a job.
about half of people in their 20s with autism are not employed.
most recent reviews tend to estimate a prevalence of 1–2 per 1,000 for autism and close to 6 per 1,000 for asd as of 2007.
a 2016 survey in the united states reported a rate of 25 per 1,000 children for asd.
globally, autism affects an estimated 24.8 million people , while asperger syndrome affects a further 37.2 million.
in 2012, the nhs estimated that the overall prevalence of autism among adults aged 18 years and over in the uk was 1.1%.
rates of pdd-nos's has been estimated at 3.7 per 1,000, asperger syndrome at roughly 0.6 per 1,000, and childhood disintegrative disorder at 0.02 per 1,000.
the number of reported cases of autism increased dramatically in the 1990s and early 2000s.
boys are at higher risk for asd than girls.
the sex ratio averages 4.3:1 and is greatly modified by cognitive impairment: it may be close to 2:1 with intellectual disability and more than 5.5:1 without.
several theories about the higher prevalence in males have been investigated, but the cause of the difference is unconfirmed; one theory is that females are underdiagnosed.
most professionals believe that race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic background do not affect the occurrence of autism.
several other conditions are common in children with autism.
they include: a few examples of autistic symptoms and treatments were described long before autism was named.
a soviet child psychiatrist, grunya sukhareva, described a similar syndrome that was published in russian in 1925, and in german in 1926.
asperger was investigating an asd now known as asperger syndrome, though for various reasons it was not widely recognized as a separate diagnosis until 1981.
it is not known whether kanner derived the term independently of asperger.
donald triplett was the first person diagnosed with autism.
he was diagnosed by kanner after being first examined in 1938, and was labeled as "case 1".
triplett was noted for his savant abilities, particularly being able to name musical notes played on a piano and to mentally multiply numbers.
his father, oliver, described him as socially withdrawn but interested in number patterns, music notes, letters of the alphabet, and u.s. president pictures.
by the age of 2, he had the ability to recite the 23rd psalm and memorized 25 questions and answers from the presbyterian catechism.
he was also interested in creating musical chords.
starting in the late 1960s autism was established as a separate syndrome.
it took until 1980 for the dsm-iii to differentiate autism from childhood schizophrenia.
in 1987, the dsm-iii-r provided a checklist for diagnosing autism.
in may 2013, the dsm-5 was released, updating the classification for pervasive developmental disorders.
the two categories that exist are impaired social communication and/or interaction, and restricted and/or repetitive behaviors.
societal and cultural aspects of autism have developed: some in the community seek a cure, while others believe that autism is simply another way of being.
an autistic culture has emerged, accompanied by the autistic rights and neurodiversity movements.
events include world autism awareness day, autism sunday, autistic pride day, autreat, and others.
organizations dedicated to promoting awareness of autism include autistic self advocacy network, aspies for freedom, autism national committee, and autism society of america.
social-science scholars study those with autism in hopes to learn more about "autism as a culture, transcultural comparisons... and research on social movements."
while most autistic individuals do not have savant skills, many have been successful in their fields.
autism rights or neurodiversity advocates believe that the autism spectrum is genetic and should be accepted as a natural expression of the human genome.
about half of autistics are unemployed, and one third of those with graduate degrees may be unemployed.
among autistics who find work, most are employed in sheltered settings working for wages below the national minimum.
a majority of the economic burden of autism is caused by decreased earnings in the job market.
some studies also find decreased earning among parents who care for autistic children.
surface albedo is defined as the ratio of radiosity to the irradiance (flux per unit area) received by a surface.
these factors vary with atmospheric composition, geographic location and time (see position of the sun).
the temporal resolution may range from seconds (as obtained from flux measurements) to daily, monthly, or annual averages.
unless given for a specific wavelength (spectral albedo), albedo refers to the entire spectrum of solar radiation.
due to measurement constraints, it is often given for the spectrum in which most solar energy reaches the surface (between 0.3 and 3 μm).
the term albedo was introduced into optics by johann heinrich lambert in his 1760 work "photometria".
any albedo in visible light falls within a range of about 0.9 for fresh snow to about 0.04 for charcoal, one of the darkest substances.
deeply shadowed cavities can achieve an effective albedo approaching the zero of a black body.
most land areas are in an albedo range of 0.1 to 0.4.
the average albedo of earth is about 0.3.
this is far higher than for the ocean primarily because of the contribution of clouds.
bdrf can facilitate translations of observations of reflectance into albedo.
earth's average surface temperature due to its albedo and the greenhouse effect is currently about 15 °c.
if earth were frozen entirely (and hence be more reflective), the average temperature of the planet would drop below −40 °c.
if only the continental land masses became covered by glaciers, the mean temperature of the planet would drop to about 0 °c.
the albedos of planets, satellites and minor planets such as asteroids can be used to infer much about their properties.
for small and far objects that cannot be resolved by telescopes, much of what we know comes from the study of their albedos.
enceladus, a moon of saturn, has one of the highest known albedos of any body in the solar system, with an albedo of 0.99.
another notable high-albedo body is eris, with an albedo of 0.96.
many small objects in the outer solar system and asteroid belt have low albedos down to about 0.05.
a typical comet nucleus has an albedo of 0.04.
such a dark surface is thought to be indicative of a primitive and heavily space weathered surface containing some organic compounds.
the overall albedo of the moon is measured to be around 0.14, but it is strongly directional and non-lambertian, displaying also a strong opposition effect.
although such reflectance properties are different from those of any terrestrial terrains, they are typical of the regolith surfaces of airless solar system bodies.
their values can differ significantly, which is a common source of confusion.
through melting of reflective ice).
that said, albedo and illumination both vary by latitude.
albedo is highest near the poles and lowest in the subtropics, with a local maximum in the tropics.
tropical and sub-tropical rainforest areas have low albedo, and are much hotter than their temperate forest counterparts, which have lower insolation.
arctic regions notably release more heat back into space than what they absorb, effectively cooling the earth.
this feedback loop results in a reduced albedo effect.
albedo affects climate by determining how much radiation a planet absorbs.
the uneven heating of earth from albedo variations between land, ice, or ocean surfaces can drive weather.
when an area's albedo changes due to snowfall, a snow–temperature feedback results.
a layer of snowfall increases local albedo, reflecting away sunlight, leading to local cooling.
over antarctica snow albedo averages a little more than 0.8.
just as fresh snow has a higher albedo than does dirty snow, the albedo of snow-covered sea ice is far higher than that of sea water.
sea water absorbs more solar radiation than would the same surface covered with reflective snow.
the extra absorbed energy heats the sea water, which in turn increases the rate at which sea ice melts.
as with the preceding example of snowmelt, the process of melting of sea ice is thus another example of a positive feedback.
both positive feedback loops have long been recognized as important for global warming.
cryoconite, powdery windblown dust containing soot, sometimes reduces albedo on glaciers and ice sheets.
albedo works on a smaller scale, too.
albedo can affect the electrical energy output of solar photovoltaic devices.
research showed impacts of over 10%.
in the case of evergreen forests with seasonal snow cover albedo reduction may be great enough for deforestation to cause a net cooling effect.
trees also impact climate in extremely complicated ways through evapotranspiration.
scientists generally treat evapotranspiration as a net cooling impact, and the net climate impact of albedo and evapotranspiration changes from deforestation depends greatly on local climate.
deciduous trees have an albedo value of about 0.15 to 0.18 whereas coniferous trees have a value of about 0.09 to 0.15.
studies by the hadley centre have investigated the relative (generally warming) effect of albedo change and (cooling) effect of carbon sequestration on planting forests.
water reflects light very differently from typical terrestrial materials.
the reflectivity of a water surface is calculated using the fresnel equations (see graph).
at the scale of the wavelength of light even wavy water is always smooth so the light is reflected in a locally specular manner (not diffusely).
the glint of light off water is a commonplace effect of this.
at small angles of incident light, waviness results in reduced reflectivity because of the steepness of the reflectivity-vs.-incident-angle curve and a locally increased average incident angle.
however, as mentioned above, waviness causes an appreciable reduction.
fresh 'black' ice exhibits fresnel reflection.
snow on top of this sea ice increases the albedo to 0.9.
cloud albedo has substantial influence over atmospheric temperatures.
different types of clouds exhibit different reflectivity, theoretically ranging in albedo from a minimum of near 0 to a maximum approaching 0.8.
"on any given day, about half of earth is covered by clouds, which reflect more sunlight than land and water.
clouds keep earth cool by reflecting sunlight, but they can also serve as blankets to trap warmth."
albedo and climate in some areas are affected by artificial clouds, such as those created by the contrails of heavy commercial airliner traffic.
aerosols (very fine particles/droplets in the atmosphere) have both direct and indirect effects on earth's radiative balance.
as per spracklen et al.
the effects are: another albedo-related effect on the climate is from black carbon particles.
human activities (e.g., deforestation, farming, and urbanization) change the albedo of various areas around the globe.
however, quantification of this effect on the global scale is difficult, further study is required to determine anthropogenic effects.
single-scattering albedo is used to define scattering of electromagnetic waves on small particles.
it depends on properties of the material (refractive index); the size of the particle or particles; and the wavelength of the incoming radiation.
a or a is the first letter and the first vowel letter of the modern english alphabet and the iso basic latin alphabet.
its name in english is "a" (pronounced ), plural "aes".
it is similar in shape to the ancient greek letter alpha, from which it derives.
the uppercase version consists of the two slanting sides of a triangle, crossed in the middle by a horizontal bar.
the lowercase version can be written in two forms: the double-storey a and single-storey ɑ.
in the english grammar, "a", and its variant "an", are indefinite articles.
by 1600 bc, the phoenician alphabet letter had a linear form that served as the base for some later forms.
its name is thought to have corresponded closely to the paleo-hebrew or arabic aleph.
the etruscans brought the greek alphabet to their civilization in the italian peninsula and left the letter unchanged.
during roman times, there were many variant forms of the letter "a".
first was the monumental or lapidary style, which was used when inscribing on stone or other "permanent" media.
there was also a cursive style used for everyday or utilitarian writing, which was done on more perishable surfaces.
variants also existed that were intermediate between the monumental and cursive styles.
the known variants include the early semi-uncial, the uncial, and the later semi-uncial.
at the end of the roman empire (5th century ad), several variants of the cursive minuscule developed through western europe.
this form was derived through a combining of prior forms.
15th-century italy saw the formation of the two main variants that are known today.
these variants, the "italic" and "roman" forms, were derived from the caroline script version.
the italic form, also called "script a," is used in most current handwriting and consists of a circle and vertical stroke.
this slowly developed from the fifth-century form resembling the greek letter tau in the hands of medieval irish and english writers.
the roman form is used in most printed material; it consists of a small loop with an arc over it ("a").
both derive from the majuscule (capital) form.
in greek handwriting, it was common to join the left leg and horizontal stroke into a single loop, as demonstrated by the uncial version shown.
many fonts then made the right leg vertical.
italic type is commonly used to mark emphasis or more generally to distinguish one part of a text from the rest (set in roman type).
however, occurs in many common digraphs, all with their own sound or sounds, particularly , , , , and .
in most languages that use the latin alphabet, denotes an open unrounded vowel, such as , , or .
an exception is saanich, in which (and the glyph á) stands for a close-mid front unrounded vowel .
in geometry, capital a, b, c etc.
are used to denote segments, lines, rays, etc.
such associations can have a motivating effect, as exposure to the letter a has been found to improve performance, when compared with other letters.
in english grammar, "a", and its variant "an", is an indefinite article.
finally, the letter a is used to denote size, as in a narrow size shoe, or a small cup size in a brassiere.
alabama () is a state in the southeastern region of the united states.
alabama is the 30th largest by area and the 24th-most populous of the u.s. states.
with a total of of inland waterways, alabama has among the most of any state.
alabama is nicknamed the "yellowhammer state", after the state bird.
alabama is also known as the "heart of dixie" and the "cotton state".
the state tree is the longleaf pine, and the state flower is the camellia.
alabama's capital is montgomery.
the largest city by population is birmingham, which has long been the most industrialized city; the largest city by land area is huntsville.
the oldest city is mobile, founded by french colonists in 1702 as the capital of french louisiana.
greater birmingham is alabama's largest urban economy, its most populous urban area, and its economic center.
despite the growth of major industries and urban centers, white rural interests dominated the state legislature from 1901 to the 1960s.
during this time, urban interests and african americans were markedly under-represented.
following world war ii, alabama grew as the state's economy changed from one primarily based on agriculture to one with diversified interests.
the suggestion that "alabama" was borrowed from the choctaw language is unlikely.
the word's spelling varies significantly among historical sources.
as early as 1702, the french called the tribe the "alibamon", with french maps identifying the river as "rivière des alibamons".
sources disagree on the word's meaning.
the meaning may have been "clearers of the thicket" or "herb gatherers", referring to clearing land for cultivation or collecting medicinal plants.
the state has numerous place names of native american origin.
however, there are no correspondingly similar words in the alabama language.
an 1842 article in the "jacksonville republican" proposed it meant "here we rest."
this notion was popularized in the 1850s through the writings of alexander beaufort meek.
experts in the muskogean languages have not found any evidence to support such a translation.
indigenous peoples of varying cultures lived in the area for thousands of years before the advent of european colonization.
trade with the northeastern tribes by the ohio river began during the burial mound period (1000bce700ce) and continued until european contact.
this is the second-largest complex of the classic middle mississippian era, after cahokia in present-day illinois, which was the center of the culture.
analysis of artifacts from archaeological excavations at moundville were the basis of scholars' formulating the characteristics of the southeastern ceremonial complex (secc).
contrary to popular belief, the secc appears to have no direct links to mesoamerican culture, but developed independently.
the ceremonial complex represents a major component of the religion of the mississippian peoples; it is one of the primary means by which their religion is understood.
while part of the same large language family, the muskogee tribes developed distinct cultures and languages.
with exploration in the 16th century, the spanish were the first europeans to reach alabama.
the expedition of hernando de soto passed through mabila and other parts of the state in 1540.
more than 160 years later, the french founded the region's first european settlement at old mobile in 1702.
the city was moved to the current site of mobile in 1711.
this area was claimed by the french from 1702 to 1763 as part of la louisiane.
after the french lost to the british in the seven years' war, it became part of british west florida from 1763 to 1783.
after the united states victory in the american revolutionary war, the territory was divided between the united states and spain.
the latter retained control of this western territory from 1783 until the surrender of the spanish garrison at mobile to u.s. forces on april 13, 1813.
thomas bassett, a loyalist to the british monarchy during the revolutionary era, was one of the earliest white settlers in the state outside mobile.
he settled in the tombigbee district during the early 1770s.
most of what is now the northern two-thirds of alabama was known as the yazoo lands beginning during the british colonial period.
it was claimed by the province of georgia from 1767 onwards.
following the revolutionary war, it remained a part of georgia, although heavily disputed.
the yazoo lands were added to the territory in 1804, following the yazoo land scandal.
before mississippi's admission to statehood on december 10, 1817, the more sparsely settled eastern half of the territory was separated and named the alabama territory.
the united states congress created the alabama territory on march 3, 1817.
st. stephens, now abandoned, served as the territorial capital from 1817 to 1819.
alabama was admitted as the 22nd state on december 14, 1819, with congress selecting huntsville as the site for the first constitutional convention.
from july5 to august 2, 1819, delegates met to prepare the new state constitution.
huntsville served as temporary capital from 1819 to 1820, when the seat of government moved to cahaba in dallas county.
cahaba, now a ghost town, was the first permanent state capital from 1820 to 1825.
part of the frontier in the 1820s and 1830s, its constitution provided for universal suffrage for white men.
southeastern planters and traders from the upper south brought slaves with them as the cotton plantations in alabama expanded.
the area also drew many poor, disfranchised people who became subsistence farmers.
alabama had an estimated population of under 10,000 people in 1810, but it increased to more than 300,000 people by 1830.
most native american tribes were completely removed from the state within a few years of the passage of the indian removal act by congress in 1830.
from 1826 to 1846, tuscaloosa served as alabama's capital.
on january 30, 1846, the alabama legislature announced it had voted to move the capital city from tuscaloosa to montgomery.
the first legislative session in the new capital met in december 1847.
a new capitol building was erected under the direction of stephen decatur button of philadelphia.
the first structure burned down in 1849, but was rebuilt on the same site in 1851.
this second capitol building in montgomery remains to the present day.
it was designed by barachias holt of exeter, maine.
on january 11, 1861, alabama declared its secession from the union.
after remaining an independent republic for a few days, it joined the confederate states of america.
the confederacy's capital was initially at montgomery.
alabama was heavily involved in the american civil war.
although comparatively few battles were fought in the state, alabama contributed about 120,000 soldiers to the war effort.
a company of cavalry soldiers from huntsville, alabama, joined nathan bedford forrest's battalion in hopkinsville, kentucky.
the company wore new uniforms with yellow trim on the sleeves, collar and coat tails.
this led to them being greeted with "yellowhammer", and the name later was applied to all alabama troops in the confederate army.
alabama's slaves were freed by the 13th amendment in 1865.
alabama was under military rule from the end of the war in may 1865 until its official restoration to the union in 1868.
from 1867 to 1874, with most white citizens barred temporarily from voting and freedmen enfranchised, many african americans emerged as political leaders in the state.
alabama was represented in congress during this period by three african-american congressmen: jeremiah haralson, benjamin s. turner, and james t. rapier.
following the war, the state remained chiefly agricultural, with an economy tied to cotton.
during reconstruction, state legislators ratified a new state constitution in 1868 which created the state's first public school system and expanded women's rights.
legislators funded numerous public road and railroad projects, although these were plagued with allegations of fraud and misappropriation.
organized insurgent, resistance groups tried to suppress the freedmen and republicans.
besides the short-lived original ku klux klan, these included the pale faces, knights of the white camellia, red shirts, and the white league.
reconstruction in alabama ended in 1874, when the democrats regained control of the legislature and governor's office through an election dominated by fraud and violence.
they wrote another constitution in 1875, and the legislature passed the blaine amendment, prohibiting public money from being used to finance religious-affiliated schools.
the same year, legislation was approved that called for racially segregated schools.
railroad passenger cars were segregated in 1891.
the 1901 constitution required racial segregation of public schools.
by 1903, only 2,980 african americans were registered in alabama, although at least 74,000 were literate.
this compared to more than 181,000 african americans eligible to vote in 1900.
the numbers dropped even more in later decades.
by 1941, whites constituted a slight majority of those disenfranchised by these laws: 600,000 whites vs. 520,000 african-americans.
nearly all african americans had lost the ability to vote.
despite numerous legal challenges which succeeded in overturning certain provisions, the state legislature would create new ones to maintain disenfranchisement.
the exclusion of blacks from the political system persisted until after passage of federal civil rights legislation in 1965 to enforce their constitutional rights as citizens.
the rural-dominated alabama legislature consistently underfunded schools and services for the disenfranchised african americans, but it did not relieve them of paying taxes.
in alabama these schools were designed and the construction partially financed with rosenwald funds, which paid one-third of the construction costs.
the fund required the local community and state to raise matching funds to pay the rest.
black residents effectively taxed themselves twice, by raising additional monies to supply matching funds for such schools, which were built in many rural areas.
they often donated land and labor as well.
beginning in 1913, the first 80 rosenwald schools were built in alabama for african-american children.
a total of 387 schools, seven teachers' houses, and several vocational buildings were completed by 1937 in the state.
several of the surviving school buildings in the state are now listed on the national register of historic places.
reflecting this emigration, the population growth rate in alabama (see "historical populations" table below) dropped by nearly half from 1910 to 1920.
at the same time, many rural people migrated to the city of birmingham to work in new industrial jobs.
birmingham experienced such rapid growth it was called the "magic city".
by 1920, birmingham was the 36th-largest city in the united states.
heavy industry and mining were the basis of its economy.
this did not change until the late 1960s following a lawsuit and court order.
industrial development related to the demands of world war ii brought a level of prosperity to the state not seen since before the civil war.
rural workers poured into the largest cities in the state for better jobs and a higher standard of living.
one example of this massive influx of workers occurred in mobile.
between 1940 and 1943, more than 89,000 people moved into the city to work for war-related industries.
cotton and other cash crops faded in importance as the state developed a manufacturing and service base.
they held on to old representation to maintain political and economic power in agricultural areas.
urban interests were consistently underrepresented in the legislature.
in 1972, for the first time since 1901, the legislature completed the congressional redistricting based on the decennial census.
this benefited the urban areas that had developed, as well as all in the population who had been underrepresented for more than sixty years.
other changes were made to implement representative state house and senate districts.
african americans continued to press in the 1950s and 1960s to end disenfranchisement and segregation in the state through the civil rights movement, including legal challenges.
during the 1960s, under governor george wallace, alabama resisted compliance with federal demands for desegregation.
these contributed to congressional passage and enactment of the civil rights act of 1964 and voting rights act of 1965 by the u.s. congress.
legal segregation ended in the states in 1964, but jim crow customs often continued until specifically challenged in court.
according to "the new york times", by 2017, many of alabama's african-americans were living in alabama's cities such as birmingham and montgomery.
also, the black belt region across central alabama "is home to largely poor counties that are predominantly african-american.
these counties include dallas, lowndes, marengo and perry."
alabama has made some changes since the late 20th century and has used new types of voting to increase representation.
at-large voting had diluted the votes of any minority in a county, as the majority tended to take all seats.
despite african americans making up a significant minority in the state, they had been unable to elect any representatives in most of the at-large jurisdictions.
this has resulted in more proportional representation for voters.
in another form of proportional representation, 23 jurisdictions use limited voting, as in conecuh county.
in 1982, limited voting was first tested in conecuh county.
about three-fifths of the land area is a gentle plain with a general descent towards the mississippi river and the gulf of mexico.
alabama is bordered by the states of tennessee to the north, georgia to the east, florida to the south, and mississippi to the west.
alabama has coastline at the gulf of mexico, in the extreme southern edge of the state.
the state ranges in elevation from sea level at mobile bay to nearly half a mile in the northeast, to wit mount cheaha at .
alabama's land consists of of forest or 67% of total land area.
suburban baldwin county, along the gulf coast, is the largest county in the state in both land area and water area.
additionally, alabama has four national forests: conecuh, talladega, tuskegee, and william b. bankhead.
alabama also contains the natchez trace parkway, the selma to montgomery national historic trail, and the trail of tears national historic trail.
a -wide meteorite impact crater is located in elmore county, just north of montgomery.
this is the wetumpka crater, the site of "alabama's greatest natural disaster".
a -wide meteorite hit the area about 80 million years ago.
in 2002, christian koeberl with the institute of geochemistry university of vienna published evidence and established the site as the 157th recognized impact crater on earth.
the state is classified as humid subtropical ("cfa") under the koppen climate classification.
the average annual temperature is 64 °f (18 °c).
generally, alabama has very hot summers and mild winters with copious precipitation throughout the year.
alabama receives an average of of rainfall annually and enjoys a lengthy growing season of up to 300 days in the southern part of the state.
summers in alabama are among the hottest in the u.s., with high temperatures averaging over throughout the summer in some parts of the state.
alabama is also prone to tropical storms and even hurricanes.
south alabama reports many thunderstorms.
the gulf coast, around mobile bay, averages between 70 and 80 days per year with thunder reported.
this activity decreases somewhat further north in the state, but even the far north of the state reports thunder on about 60 days per year.
occasionally, thunderstorms are severe with frequent lightning and large hail; the central and northern parts of the state are most vulnerable to this type of storm.
alabama ranks ninth in the number of deaths from lightning and tenth in the number of deaths from lightning strikes per capita.
several long-tracked f5/ef5 tornadoes have contributed to alabama reporting more tornado fatalities since 1950 than any other state.
the state was affected by the 1974 super outbreak and was devastated tremendously by the 2011 super outbreak.
the 2011 super outbreak produced a record amount of tornadoes in the state.
the tally reached 62.
the peak season for tornadoes varies from the northern to southern parts of the state.
alabama is one of the few places in the world that has a secondary tornado season in november and december besides the typically severe spring.
the northern part—along the tennessee river valley—is most vulnerable.
the area of alabama and mississippi most affected by tornadoes is sometimes referred to as dixie alley, as distinct from the tornado alley of the southern plains.
historic snowfall events include new year's eve 1963 snowstorm and the 1993 storm of the century.
the annual average snowfall for the birmingham area is per year.
in the southern gulf coast, snowfall is less frequent, sometimes going several years without any snowfall.
alabama's highest temperature of was recorded on september 5, 1925, in the unincorporated community of centerville.
the record low of occurred on january 30, 1966, in new market.
the state is usually ranked among the top in nation for its range of overall biodiversity.
alabama is in the subtropical coniferous forest biome and once boasted huge expanses of pine forest, which still form the largest proportion of forests in the state.
it currently ranks fifth in the nation for the diversity of its flora.
it is home to nearly 4,000 pteridophyte and spermatophyte plant species.
invertebrates include 97 crayfish species and 383 mollusk species.
113 of these mollusk species have never been collected outside the state.
immigration from outside the u.s. resulted in a net increase of 31,180 people, and migration within the country produced a net gain of 73,811 people.
the state had 108,000 foreign-born (2.4% of the state population), of which an estimated 22.2% were undocumented (24,000).
the center of population of alabama is located in chilton county, outside the town of jemison.
according to the 2010 census, alabama had a population of 4,779,736.
in 2011, 46.6% of alabama's population younger than age1 were minorities.
demographers estimate that 20–23% of people in alabama are of predominantly english ancestry and the figure is likely higher.
in the 1980 census, 41% of the people in alabama identified as being of english ancestry, making them the largest ethnic group at the time.
based on historic migration and settlement patterns in the southern colonies and states, demographers estimated there are more people in alabama of scots-irish origins than self-reported.
in 1984, under the davis–strong act, the state legislature established the alabama indian affairs commission.
native american groups within the state had increasingly been demanding recognition as ethnic groups and seeking an end to discrimination.
in the past, their self-identification was often overlooked as the state tried to impose a binary breakdown of society into white and black.
the state has officially recognized nine american indian tribes in the state, descended mostly from the five civilized tribes of the american southeast.
these are the following.
most alabama residents (95.1% of those five and older) spoke only english at home in 2010, a minor decrease from 96.1% in 2000.
alabama english is predominantly southern, and is related to south midland speech which was taken across the border from tennessee.
in the major southern speech region, there is the decreasing loss of the final /r/, for example the /boyd/ pronunciation of 'bird'.
in the northern third of the state, there is a south midland 'arm' and 'barb' rhyming with 'form' and 'orb'.
the composition of other traditions is 0.5% mormon, 0.5% jewish, 0.5% muslim, 0.5% buddhist, and 0.5% hindu.
alabama is located in the middle of the bible belt, a region of numerous protestant christians.
alabama has been identified as one of the most religious states in the united states, with about 58% of the population attending church regularly.
a majority of people in the state identify as evangelical protestant.
, the three largest denominational groups in alabama are the southern baptist convention, the united methodist church, and non-denominational evangelical protestant.
many baptist and methodist congregations became established in the great awakening of the early 19th century, when preachers proselytized across the south.
the assemblies of god had almost 60,000 members, the churches of christ had nearly 120,000 members.
in a 2007 survey, nearly 70% of respondents could name all four of the christian gospels.
of those who indicated a religious preference, 59% said they possessed a "full understanding" of their faith and needed no further learning.
in a 2007 poll, 92% of alabamians reported having at least some confidence in churches in the state.
jews have been present in what is now alabama since 1763, during the colonial era of mobile, when sephardic jews immigrated from london.
the oldest jewish congregation in the state is congregation sha'arai shomayim in mobile.
it was formally recognized by the state legislature on january 25, 1844.
later immigrants in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries tended to be ashkenazi jews from eastern europe.
jewish denominations in the state include two orthodox, four conservative, ten reform, and one humanistic synagogue.
muslims have been increasing in alabama, with 31 mosques built by 2011, many by african-american converts.
there are six dharma centers and organizations for theravada buddhists.
most monastic buddhist temples are concentrated in southern mobile county, near bayou la batre.
this area has attracted an influx of refugees from cambodia, laos, and vietnam during the 1970s and thereafter.
the four temples within a ten-mile radius of bayou la batre, include chua chanh giac, wat buddharaksa, and wat lao phoutthavihan.
the first community of adherents of the bahá'í faith in alabama was founded in 1896 by paul k. dealy, who moved from chicago to fairhope.
bahá'í centers in alabama exist in birmingham, huntsville, and florence.
residents of the state, along with those in five other states, were least likely in the nation to be physically active during leisure time.
alabama, and the southeastern u.s. in general, has one of the highest incidences of adult onset diabetes in the country, exceeding 10% of adults.
the law, if enacted, would punish doctors who perform abortions with 10 to 99 years imprisonment and be the most restrictive abortion law in the country.
however, on october 29, 2019, u.s. district judge myron thompson blocked the law from taking effect.
by 2006, crop and animal production in alabama was valued at $1.5 billion.
in contrast to the primarily agricultural economy of the previous century, this was only about 1% of the state's gross domestic product.
according to the u.s. bureau of economic analysis, the 2008 total gross state product was $170 billion, or $29,411 per capita.
alabama's 2012 gdp increased 1.2% from the previous year.
the single largest increase came in the area of information.
in 2010, per capita income for the state was $22,984.
the state's seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was 5.8% in april 2015.
this compared to a nationwide seasonally adjusted rate of 5.4%.
alabama has no minimum wage and in february 2016 passed legislation preventing municipalities from setting one.
(a birmingham city ordinance would have raised theirs to $10.10.)
, alabama has the sixth highest poverty rate among states in the u.s.
a great deal of alabama's economic growth since the 1990s has been due to the state's expanding automotive manufacturing industry.
since 1993, the automobile industry has generated more than 67,800 new jobs in the state.
alabama currently ranks 4th in the nation for vehicle exports.
automakers accounted for approximately a third of the industrial expansion in the state in 2012.
the eight models produced at the state's auto factories totaled combined sales of 74,335 vehicles for 2012.
the strongest model sales during this period were the hyundai elantra compact car, the mercedes-benz gl-class sport utility vehicle and the honda ridgeline sport utility truck.
steel producers outokumpu, nucor, ssab, thyssenkrupp, and u.s. steel have facilities in alabama and employ more than 10,000 people.
in may 2007, german steelmaker thyssenkrupp selected calvert in mobile county for a 4.65 billion combined stainless and carbon steel processing facility.
thyssenkrupp's stainless steel division, inoxum, including the stainless portion of the calvert plant, was sold to finnish stainless steel company outokumpu in 2012.
the remaining portion of the thyssenkrupp plant had final bids submitted by arcelormittal and nippon steel for $1.6 billion in march 2013.
companhia siderúrgica nacional submitted a combined bid for the mill at calvert, plus a majority stake in the thyssenkrupp mill in brazil, for $3.8 billion.
in july 2013, the plant was sold to arcelormittal and nippon steel.
the hunt refining company, a subsidiary of hunt consolidated, inc., is based in tuscaloosa and operates a refinery there.
the company also operates terminals in mobile, melvin, and moundville.
jvc america, inc. operates an optical disc replication and packaging plant in tuscaloosa.
the goodyear tire and rubber company operates a large plant in gadsden which employs about 1,400 people.
it has been in operation since 1929.
the plans include a $600 million factory at the brookley aeroplex for the assembly of the a319, a320 and a321 aircraft.
construction began in 2013, with plans for it to become operable by 2015 and produce up to 50 aircraft per year by 2017.
the assembly plant is the company's first factory to be built within the united states.
it was announced on february 1, 2013, that airbus had hired alabama-based hoar construction to oversee construction of the facility.
according to business insider, alabama ranked 14th in most popular states to visit in 2014.
in 2006, 22.3 million travellers spent $8.3 billion providing an estimated 162,000 jobs in the state.
mobile is known for having the oldest organized mardi gras celebration in the united states, beginning in 1703.
it was also host to the first formally organized mardi gras parade in the united states in 1830, a tradition that continues to this day.
mardi gras is an official state holiday in mobile and baldwin counties.
in 2018, mobile's mardi gras parade was the state's top event, producing the most tourists with an attendance of 892,811.
the top attraction was the u.s. space & rocket center in huntsville with an attendance of 849,981, followed by the birmingham zoo with 543,090.
of the parks and natural destinations, alabama's gulf coast topped the list with 6,700,000 visitors.
alabama has historically been a popular region for film shoots due to its diverse landscapes and contrast of environments.
uab hospital is the only level i trauma center in alabama.
uab is the largest state government employer in alabama, with a workforce of about 18,000.
regions financial corporation and bbva usa bank are the largest banks headquartered in alabama.
birmingham-based compass banchshares was acquired by spanish-based bbva in september 2007 with the headquarters of bbva usa remaining in birmingham.
in november 2006, regions financial acquired amsouth bancorporation, which was also headquartered in birmingham.
southtrust corporation, another large bank headquartered in birmingham, was acquired by wachovia in 2004.
wells fargo has a regional headquarters, an operations center campus, and a $400 million data center in birmingham.
many smaller banks are also headquartered in the birmingham area, including servisfirst and new south federal savings bank.
birmingham also serves as the headquarters for several large investment management companies, including harbert management corporation.
telecommunications provider at&t, formerly bellsouth, has a major presence in alabama with several large offices in birmingham.
many commercial technology companies are headquartered in huntsville, such as network access company adtran, computer graphics company intergraph, and it infrastructure company avocent.
rust international has grown to include brasfield & gorrie, be&k, hoar construction, and b.l.
harbert international, which all routinely are included in the engineering news-record lists of top design, international construction, and engineering firms.
(rust international was acquired in 2000 by washington group international, which was in turn acquired by san-francisco based urs corporation in 2007.)
the foundational document for alabama's government is the alabama constitution, which was ratified in 1901.
there has been a significant movement to rewrite and modernize alabama's constitution.
critics argue that alabama's constitution maintains highly centralized power with the state legislature, leaving practically no power in local hands.
most counties do not have home rule.
any policy changes proposed in different areas of the state must be approved by the entire alabama legislature and, frequently, by state referendum.
one criticism of the current constitution claims that its complexity and length intentionally codify segregation and racism.
alabama's government is divided into three coequal branches.
the legislature is responsible for writing, debating, passing, or defeating state legislation.
the republican party currently holds a majority in both houses of the legislature.
the legislature has the power to override a gubernatorial veto by a simple majority (most state legislatures require a two-thirds majority to override a veto).
until 1964, the state elected state senators on a geographic basis by county, with one per county.
it had not redistricted congressional districts since passage of its constitution in 1901; as a result, urbanized areas were grossly underrepresented.
it had not changed legislative districts to reflect the decennial censuses, either.
this had caused decades of underinvestment in such areas.
for instance, birmingham and jefferson county taxes had supplied one-third of the state budget, but jefferson county received only 1/67th of state services in funding.
through the legislative delegations, the alabama legislature kept control of county governments.
the executive branch is responsible for the execution and oversight of laws.
it is headed by the governor of alabama.
the current governor is republican kay ivey.
the members of the legislature take office immediately after the november elections.
statewide officials, such as the governor, lieutenant governor, attorney general, and other constitutional officers, take office the following january.
the judicial branch is responsible for interpreting the state's constitution and applying the law in state criminal and civil cases.
the state's highest court is the supreme court of alabama.
alabama uses partisan elections to select judges.
since the 1980s judicial campaigns have become increasingly politicized.
the current chief justice of the alabama supreme court is republican tom parker.
all sitting justices on the alabama supreme court are members of the republican party.
some critics believe the election of judges has contributed to an exceedingly high rate of executions.
alabama has the highest per capita death penalty rate in the country.
in some years, it imposes more death sentences than does texas, a state which has a population five times larger.
however, executions per capita are significantly higher in texas.
some of its cases have been highly controversial; the supreme court has overturned 24 convictions in death penalty cases.
this judicial authority was removed in april 2017.
taxes are collected by the alabama department of revenue.
alabama levies a 2, 4, or5 percent personal income tax, depending on the amount earned and filing status.
the state's general sales tax rate is 4%.
sales tax rates for cities and counties are also added to purchases.
, sales and excise taxes in alabama account for 51% of all state and local revenue, compared with an average of about 36% nationwide.
(most states exempt groceries from sales tax or apply a lower tax rate.)
alabama's threshold is the lowest among the 41 states and the district of columbia with income taxes.
the corporate income tax rate is currently 6.5%.
the overall federal, state, and local tax burden in alabama ranks the state as the second least tax-burdened state in the country.
property taxes are the lowest in the u.s.
the current state constitution requires a voter referendum to raise property taxes.
since alabama's tax structure largely depends on consumer spending, it is subject to high variable budget structure.
for example, in 2003, alabama had an annual budget deficit as high as $670 million.
alabama has 67 counties.
each county has its own elected legislative branch, usually called the county commission.
it also has limited executive authority in the county.
legislative delegations retain certain powers over each county.
before that, each county was represented by one state senator, leading to under-representation in the state senate for more urbanized, populous counties.
a significant part of each legislative session is spent on local legislation, taking away time and attention of legislators from issues of statewide importance."
alabama is an alcoholic beverage control state, meaning the state government holds a monopoly on the sale of alcohol.
the alabama alcoholic beverage control board controls the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state.
during reconstruction following the american civil war, alabama was occupied by federal troops of the third military district under general john pope.
after 1890, a coalition of white democratic politicians passed laws to segregate and disenfranchise african american residents, a process completed in provisions of the 1901 constitution.
provisions which disenfranchised blacks resulted in excluding many poor whites.
by 1941 more whites than blacks had been disenfranchised: 600,000 to 520,000.
the total effects were greater on the black community, as almost all its citizens were disfranchised and relegated to separate and unequal treatment under the law.
from 1901 through the 1960s, the state did not redraw election districts as population grew and shifted within the state during urbanization and industrialization of certain areas.
governor george wallace, the state's only four-term governor, was a controversial figure who vowed to maintain segregation.
in many jurisdictions, they continued to be excluded from representation by at-large electoral systems, which allowed the majority of the population to dominate elections.
some changes at the county level have occurred following court challenges to establish single-member districts that enable a more diverse representation among county boards.
in 2007, the alabama legislature passed, and republican governor bob riley signed a resolution expressing "profound regret" over slavery and its lingering impact.
in a symbolic ceremony, the bill was signed in the alabama state capitol, which housed congress of the confederate states of america.
in 2010, republicans won control of both houses of the legislature for the first time in 136 years.
, there are a total of 3,326,812 registered voters, with 2,979,576 active, and the others inactive in the state.
since the mid- to late 20th century, however, white conservatives started shifting to the republican party.
in alabama, majority-white districts are now expected to regularly elect republican candidates to federal, state and local office.
members of the nine seats on the supreme court of alabama and all ten seats on the state appellate courts are elected to office.
until 1994, no republicans held any of the court seats.
this ultimately led to a collapse of support for democrats at the ballot box in the next three or four election cycles.
the democrats lost the last of the nineteen court seats in august 2011 with the resignation of the last democrat on the bench.
in the early 21st century, republicans hold all seven of the statewide elected executive branch offices.
republicans hold six of the eight elected seats on the alabama state board of education.
in 2010, republicans took large majorities of both chambers of the state legislature, giving them control of that body for the first time in 136 years.
the last remaining statewide democrat, who served on the alabama public service commission was defeated in 2012.
the three gop lieutenant governors are steve windom (1999–2003), kay ivey (2011–2017), and will ainsworth (2019–present).
many local offices (county commissioners, boards of education, tax assessors, tax collectors, etc.)
in the state are still held by democrats.
many rural counties have voters who are majority democrats, resulting in local elections being decided in the democratic primary.
similarly many metropolitan and suburban counties are majority-republican and elections are effectively decided in the republican primary, although there are exceptions.
alabama's 67 county sheriffs are elected in partisan, at-large races, and democrats still retain the narrow majority of those posts.
the current split is 35 democrats, 31 republicans, and one independent fayette.
however, most of the democratic sheriffs preside over rural and less populated counties.
the majority of republican sheriffs have been elected in the more urban/suburban and heavily populated counties.
, the state of alabama has one female sheriff, in morgan county, alabama, and ten african-american sheriffs.
the state's two u.s. senators are republican richard c. shelby and democrat doug jones.
shelby was originally elected to the senate as a democrat in 1986 and re-elected in 1992, but switched parties immediately following the november 1994 general election.
together, 1,496 individual schools provide education for 744,637 elementary and secondary students.
public school funding is appropriated through the alabama legislature through the education trust fund.
in fy 2006–2007, alabama appropriated $3,775,163,578 for primary and secondary education.
that represented an increase of $444,736,387 over the previous fiscal year.
while alabama's public education system has improved in recent decades, it lags behind in achievement compared to other states.
the largest educational gains were among people with some college education but without degrees.
the rate of school corporal punishment in alabama is surpassed only by mississippi and arkansas.
alabama's programs of higher education include 14 four-year public universities, two-year community colleges, and 17 private, undergraduate and graduate universities.
public, post-secondary education in alabama is overseen by the alabama commission on higher education and the alabama department of postsecondary education.
colleges and universities in alabama offer degree programs from two-year associate degrees to a multitude of doctoral level programs.
the largest single campus is the university of alabama, located in tuscaloosa, with 37,665 enrolled for fall 2016.
the oldest institutions are the public university of north alabama in florence and the catholic church-affiliated spring hill college in mobile, both founded in 1830.
major newspapers include "birmingham news", mobile "press-register", and "montgomery advertiser".
in the 2013 season, alabama averaged over 100,000 fans per game and auburn averaged over 80,000 fans, both numbers among the top 20 in the nation.
bryant–denny stadium is the home of the alabama football team, and has a seating capacity of 101,821, and is the fifth largest stadium in america.
jordan-hare stadium is the home field of the auburn football team and seats up to 87,451.
legion field is home for the uab blazers football program and the birmingham bowl.
it seats 71,594.
alabama has several professional and semi-professional sports teams, including three minor league baseball teams.
the talladega superspeedway motorsports complex hosts a series of nascar events.
it has a seating capacity of 143,000 and is the thirteenth largest stadium in the world and sixth largest stadium in america.
also, the barber motorsports park has hosted indycar series and rolex sports car series races.
the atp birmingham was a world championship tennis tournament held from 1973 to 1980.
i-22 enters the state from mississippi and connects birmingham with memphis, tennessee.
a sixth route, i-685, will be formed when i-85 is rerouted along a new southern bypass of montgomery.
a proposed northern bypass of birmingham will be designated as i-422.
since a direct connection from i-22 to i-422 will not be possible, i-222 has been proposed, as well.
several u.s.
the port of mobile was ranked 12th by tons of traffic in the united states during 2009.
the newly expanded container terminal at the port of mobile was ranked as the 25th busiest for container traffic in the nation during 2011.
the state's other ports are on rivers with access to the gulf of mexico.
water ports of alabama, listed from north to south: "alabama—history and culture".
adventure tourism—experiential travel guides.
accessed: march 31, 2017.
he was the son of the nereid thetis and peleus, king of phthia.
achilles' most notable feat during the trojan war was the slaying of the trojan prince hector outside the gates of troy.
the achilles tendon is also named after him due to these legends.
the grief or distress of the people is a theme raised numerous times in the "iliad" (and frequently by achilles himself).
furthermore, "laós" has been construed by gregory nagy, following leonard palmer, to mean "a corps of soldiers", a muster.
the poem is in part about the misdirection of anger on the part of leadership.
the shift from "-dd-" to "-ll-" is then ascribed to the passing of the name into greek via a pre-greek source.
the whole expression would be comparable to the latin "acupedius" "swift of foot".
some researchers deem the name a loan word, possibly from a pre-greek language.
achilles was the son of the nereid thetis and of peleus, the king of the myrmidons.
for this reason, the two gods withdrew their pursuit, and had her wed peleus.
thetis, although a daughter of the sea-god nereus, was also brought up by hera, further explaining her resistance to the advances of zeus.
zeus was furious and decreed that she would never marry an immortal.
it is not clear if this version of events was known earlier.
she was interrupted by peleus and abandoned both father and son in a rage.
none of the sources before statius make any reference to this general invulnerability.
he cast two spears at once, one grazed achilles' elbow, "drawing a spurt of blood".
also, in the fragmentary poems of the epic cycle in which one can find description of the hero's death (i.e.
peleus entrusted achilles to chiron the centaur, on mount pelion, to be reared.
thetis foretold that her son's fate was either to gain glory and die young, or to live a long but uneventful life in obscurity.
achilles chose the former, and decided to take part in the trojan war.
according to homer, achilles grew up in phthia together with his companion patroclus.
there, achilles is disguised as a girl and lives among lycomedes' daughters, perhaps under the name "pyrrha" (the red-haired girl).
according to this story, odysseus learns from the prophet calchas that the achaeans would be unable to capture troy without achilles' aid.
odysseus goes to skyros in the guise of a peddler selling women's clothes and jewellery and places a shield and spear among his goods.
when achilles instantly takes up the spear, odysseus sees through his disguise and convinces him to join the greek campaign.
according to the "iliad", achilles arrived at troy with 50 ships, each carrying 50 myrmidons.
he appointed five leaders (each leader commanding 500 myrmidons): menesthius, eudorus, peisander, phoenix and alcimedon.
when the greeks left for the trojan war, they accidentally stopped in mysia, ruled by king telephus.
guided by the oracle, he arrived at argos, where achilles healed him in order that he might become their guide for the voyage to troy.
according to other reports in euripides' lost play about telephus, he went to aulis pretending to be a beggar and asked achilles to heal his wound.
achilles refused, claiming to have no medical knowledge.
alternatively, telephus held orestes for ransom, the ransom being achilles' aid in healing the wound.
odysseus reasoned that the spear had inflicted the wound; therefore, the spear must be able to heal it.
pieces of the spear were scraped off onto the wound and telephus was healed.
despite his youth, he was one of the main trojan war leaders, a "horse fighter" or "chariot fighter" according to homer.
prophecies linked troilus' fate to that of troy and so he was ambushed in an attempt to capture him.
later versions of the story suggested troilus was accidentally killed by achilles in an over-ardent lovers' embrace.
in this version of the myth, achilles' death therefore came in retribution for this sacrilege.
ancient writers treated troilus as the epitome of a dead child mourned by his parents.
homer's "iliad" is the most famous narrative of achilles' deeds in the trojan war.
achilles' wrath (μῆνις ἀχιλλέως, "mênis achilléōs") is the central theme of the poem.
it begins with achilles' withdrawal from battle after being dishonoured by agamemnon, the commander of the achaean forces.
agamemnon has taken a woman named chryseis as his slave.
her father chryses, a priest of apollo, begs agamemnon to return her to him.
agamemnon refuses, and apollo sends a plague amongst the greeks.
the prophet calchas correctly determines the source of the troubles but will not speak unless achilles vows to protect him.
achilles does so, and calchas declares that chryseis must be returned to her father.
agamemnon consents, but then commands that achilles' battle prize briseis, the daughter of briseus, be brought to him to replace chryseis.
agamemnon agrees and sends odysseus and two other chieftains, ajax and phoenix, to achilles with the offer of the return of briseis and other gifts.
achilles rejects all agamemnon offers him and simply urges the greeks to sail home as he was planning to do.
the trojans, led by hector, subsequently push the greek army back toward the beaches and assault the greek ships.
patroclus succeeds in pushing the trojans back from the beaches, but is killed by hector before he can lead a proper assault on the city of troy.
after receiving the news of the death of patroclus from antilochus, the son of nestor, achilles grieves over his beloved companion's death.
his mother thetis comes to comfort the distraught achilles.
she persuades hephaestus to make new armour for him, in place of the armour that patroclus had been wearing, which was taken by hector.
the new armour includes the shield of achilles, described in great detail in the poem.
achilles even engages in battle with the river god scamander, who has become angry that achilles is choking his waters with all the men he has killed.
the god tries to drown achilles but is stopped by hera and hephaestus.
finally, achilles finds his prey.
after hector realizes the trick, he knows the battle is inevitable.
wanting to go down fighting, he charges at achilles with his only weapon, his sword, but misses.
accepting his fate, hector begs achilles, not to spare his life, but to treat his body with respect after killing him.
achilles then kills hector and drags his corpse by its heels behind his chariot.
after having a dream where patroclus begs achilles to hold his funeral, achilles hosts a series of funeral games in his honour.
the poem ends with a description of hector's funeral, with the doom of troy and achilles himself still to come.
when penthesilea, queen of the amazons and daughter of ares, arrives in troy, priam hopes that she will defeat achilles.
after his temporary truce with priam, achilles fights and kills the warrior queen, only to grieve over her death later.
at first, he was so distracted by her beauty, he did not fight as intensely as usual.
once he realized that his distraction was endangering his life, he refocused and killed her.
following the death of patroclus, nestor's son antilochus becomes achilles' closest companion.
when memnon, son of the dawn goddess eos and king of ethiopia, slays antilochus, achilles once more obtains revenge on the battlefield, killing memnon.
consequently, eos will not let the sun rise, until zeus persuades her.
many homeric scholars argued that episode inspired many details in the "iliad"s description of the death of patroclus and achilles' reaction to it.
the "aethiopis" is now lost, except for scattered fragments quoted by later authors.
the exact nature of achilles' relationship with patroclus has been a subject of dispute in both the classical period and modern times.
in the "iliad", it appears to be the model of a deep and loyal friendship.
homer does not suggest that achilles and his close friend patroclus were lovers.
commentators from classical antiquity to the present have often interpreted the relationship through the lens of their own cultures.
in 5th-century bc athens, the intense bond was often viewed in light of the greek custom of "paiderasteia".
many pairs of men throughout history have been compared to achilles and patroclus to imply a homosexual relationship.
the death of achilles, even if considered solely as it occurred in the oldest sources, is a complex one, with many different versions.
in some versions, the god apollo guided paris' arrow.
some retellings also state that achilles was scaling the gates of troy and was hit with a poisoned arrow.
his bones were mingled with those of patroclus, and funeral games were held.
he was represented in the "aethiopis" as living after his death in the island of leuke at the mouth of the river danube.
another version of achilles' death is that he fell deeply in love with one of the trojan princesses, polyxena.
achilles asks priam for polyxena's hand in marriage.
priam is willing because it would mean the end of the war and an alliance with the world's greatest warrior.
he claims they built a massive burial mound on the beach of ilion that could be seen by anyone approaching from the ocean.
achilles was cremated and his ashes buried in the same urn as those of patroclus.
paris was later killed by philoctetes using the enormous bow of heracles.
in book 11 of homer's "odyssey", odysseus sails to the underworld and converses with the shades.
this leaves the reader with an ambiguous understanding of how achilles felt about the heroic life.
achilles' armour was the object of a feud between odysseus and telamonian ajax (ajax the greater).
after a while, when athena lifted his madness and ajax realized that he had actually been killing sheep, he was so ashamed that he committed suicide.
odysseus eventually gave the armour to neoptolemus, the son of achilles.
numerous paintings on pottery have suggested a tale not mentioned in the literary traditions.
at some point in the war, achilles and ajax were playing a board game ("petteia").
they were absorbed in the game and oblivious to the surrounding battle.
the trojans attacked and reached the heroes, who were saved only by an intervention of athena.
the cult of achilles is illustrated in the 500 bc polyxena sarcophagus, where the sacrifice of polixena near the tumulus of achilles is depicted.
(to the "race-course" he gives a length of 80 miles, c. 120 km, whereas the spit measures c. 70 km today.)
a second exploration in 1840 showed that the construction of a lighthouse had destroyed all traces of this temple.
similarly, others relate the island's name to its white cliffs, snakes or birds dwelling there.
pausanias has been told that the island is "covered with forests and full of animals, some wild, some tame.
in this island there is also achilles' temple and his statue".
leuce had also a reputation as a place of healing.
pausanias reports that the delphic pythia sent a lord of croton to be cured of a chest wound.
ammianus marcellinus attributes the healing to waters ("aquae") on the island.
a number of important commercial port cities of the greek waters were dedicated to achilles.
later attestations point to an "achílleion" in messenia (according to stephanus byzantinus) and an "achílleios" (ἀχίλλειος) in laconia.
the kings of epirus claimed to be descended from achilles through his son, neoptolemus.
he is said to have visited the tomb of achilles at achilleion while passing troy.
in ad 216 the roman emperor caracalla, while on his way to war against parthia, emulated alexander by holding games around achilles' tumulus.
the greek tragedian aeschylus wrote a trilogy of plays about achilles, given the title "achilleis" by modern scholars.
extant fragments of the "achilleis" and other aeschylean fragments have been assembled to produce a workable modern play.
the tragedian sophocles also wrote "the lovers of achilles", a play with achilles as the main character.
only a few fragments survive.
as a student of the monist parmenides and a member of the eleatic school, zeno believed time and motion to be illusions.
the romans, who traditionally traced their lineage to troy, took a highly negative view of achilles.
virgil refers to achilles as a savage and a merciless butcher of men, while horace portrays achilles ruthlessly slaying women and children.
other writers, such as catullus, propertius, and ovid, represent a second strand of disparagement, with an emphasis on achilles' erotic career.
achilles has been frequently the subject of operas, ballets and related genres.
the building is named the "achilleion", after achilles.
its paintings and statuary depict scenes from the trojan war, with particular focus on achilles.
lincoln led the nation through its greatest moral, constitutional, and political crisis in the american civil war.
he succeeded in preserving the union, abolishing slavery, bolstering the federal government, and modernizing the u.s. economy.
lincoln was born into poverty in a log cabin and was raised on the frontier primarily in indiana.
he was self-educated and became a lawyer, whig party leader, illinois state legislator, and u.s.
congressman from illinois.
in 1849 he returned to his law practice but became vexed by the opening of additional lands to slavery as a result of the kansas–nebraska act.
he reentered politics in 1854, becoming a leader in the new republican party, and he reached a national audience in the 1858 debates against stephen douglas.
lincoln ran for president in 1860, sweeping the north in victory.
pro-slavery elements in the south equated his success with the north's rejection of their right to practice slavery, and southern states began seceding from the union.
as the leader of moderate republicans, lincoln had to navigate a contentious array of factions with friends and opponents on both sides.
anti-war democrats (called "copperheads") despised him, and irreconcilable pro-confederate elements plotted his assassination.
lincoln managed the factions by exploiting their mutual enmity, by carefully distributing political patronage, and by appealing to the u.s. people.
his gettysburg address became a historic clarion call for nationalism, republicanism, equal rights, liberty, and democracy.
lincoln scrutinized the strategy and tactics in the war effort, including the selection of generals and the naval blockade of the south's trade.
he suspended "habeas corpus", and he averted british intervention by defusing the "trent" affair.
he engineered the end to slavery with his emancipation proclamation and his order that the army protect and recruit former slaves.
he also encouraged border states to outlaw slavery, and promoted the thirteenth amendment to the united states constitution, which outlawed slavery across the country.
lincoln managed his own successful re-election campaign.
he sought to heal the war-torn nation through reconciliation.
his marriage had produced four sons, two of whom preceded him in death, with severe emotional impact upon him and mary.
lincoln is remembered as the martyr hero of the united states and he is consistently ranked as one of the greatest presidents in american history.
he was a descendant of samuel lincoln, an englishman who migrated from hingham, norfolk, to its namesake, hingham, massachusetts, in 1638.
the family then migrated west, passing through new jersey, pennsylvania, and virginia.
lincoln's paternal grandparents, his namesake captain abraham lincoln and wife bathsheba (née herring), moved the family from virginia to jefferson county, kentucky.
the captain was killed in an indian raid in 1786.
his children, including eight-year-old thomas, abraham's father, witnessed the attack.
thomas then worked at odd jobs in kentucky and tennessee before the family settled in hardin county, kentucky in the early 1800s.
the heritage of lincoln's mother nancy remains unclear, but it is widely assumed that she was the daughter of lucy hanks.
thomas and nancy married on june 12, 1806, in washington county, and moved to elizabethtown, kentucky.
they had three children: sarah, abraham, and thomas, who died an infant.
thomas lincoln bought or leased farms in kentucky before losing all but of his land in court disputes over property titles.
in 1816, the family moved to indiana where the land surveys and titles were more reliable.
indiana was a "free" (non-slaveholding) territory, and they settled in an "unbroken forest" in hurricane township, perry county, indiana.
in 1860, lincoln noted that the family's move to indiana was "partly on account of slavery", but mainly due to land title difficulties.
in kentucky and indiana, thomas worked as a farmer, cabinetmaker, and carpenter.
at various times, he owned farms, livestock and town lots, paid taxes, sat on juries, appraised estates, and served on county patrols.
thomas and nancy were members of a separate baptists church, which forbade alcohol, dancing, and slavery.
overcoming financial challenges, thomas in 1827 obtained clear title to in indiana, an area which became the little pigeon creek community.
ten years later, on january 20, 1828, sarah died while giving birth to a stillborn son, devastating lincoln.
on december 2, 1819, thomas married sarah bush johnston, a widow from elizabethtown, kentucky, with three children of her own.
abraham became close to his stepmother, and called her "mother".
lincoln disliked the hard labor associated with farm life.
his family even said he was lazy, for all his "reading, scribbling, writing, ciphering, writing poetry, etc".
his stepmother acknowledged he did not enjoy "physical labor", but loved to read.
lincoln was mostly self-educated, except for some schooling from itinerant teachers of less than 12 months aggregate.
he persisted as an avid reader and retained a lifelong interest in learning.
as a teen, lincoln took responsibility for chores, and customarily gave his father all earnings from work outside the home until he was 21.
lincoln was tall, strong, and athletic, and became adept at using an ax.
he gained a reputation for strength and audacity after winning a wrestling match with the renowned leader of ruffians known as "the clary's grove boys".
abraham then became increasingly distant from thomas, in part due to his father's lack of education.
in 1831, as thomas and other family prepared to move to a new homestead in coles county, illinois, abraham struck out on his own.
he made his home in new salem, illinois for six years.
lincoln and some friends took goods by flatboat to new orleans, louisiana, where he was first exposed to slavery.
lincoln's first romantic interest was ann rutledge, whom he met when he moved to new salem.
by 1835, they were in a relationship but not formally engaged.
she died on august 25, 1835, most likely of typhoid fever.
in the early 1830s, he met mary owens from kentucky.
late in 1836, lincoln agreed to a match with owens if she returned to new salem.
owens arrived that november and he courted her for a time; however, they both had second thoughts.
on august 16, 1837, he wrote owens a letter saying he would not blame her if she ended the relationship, and she never replied.
in 1839, lincoln met mary todd in springfield, illinois, and the following year they became engaged.
she was the daughter of robert smith todd, a wealthy lawyer and businessman in lexington, kentucky.
while anxiously preparing for the nuptials, he was asked where he was going and replied, "to hell, i suppose."
in 1844, the couple bought a house in springfield near his law office.
mary kept house with the help of a hired servant and a relative.
lincoln was an affectionate husband and father of four sons, though his work regularly kept him away from home.
the oldest, robert todd lincoln, was born in 1843 and was the only child to live to maturity.
edward baker lincoln (eddie), born in 1846, died february 1, 1850, probably of tuberculosis.
lincoln "was remarkably fond of children" and the lincolns were not considered to be strict with their own.
in fact, lincoln's law partner william h. herndon would grow irritated when lincoln would bring his children to the law office.
their father, it seemed, was often too absorbed in his work to notice his children's behavior.
lincoln did not note what his children were doing or had done."
the deaths of their sons, eddie and willie, had profound effects on both parents.
lincoln suffered from "melancholy", a condition now thought to be clinical depression.
later in life, mary struggled with the stresses of losing her husband and sons, and robert committed her for a time to an asylum in 1875.
in 1832, lincoln joined with a partner, denton offutt, in the purchase of a general store on credit in new salem.
although the economy was booming, the business struggled and lincoln eventually sold his share.
that march he entered politics, running for the illinois general assembly, advocating navigational improvements on the sangamon river.
he could draw crowds as a raconteur, but he lacked the requisite formal education, powerful friends, and money, and lost the election.
lincoln briefly interrupted his campaign to serve as a captain in the illinois militia during the black hawk war.
lincoln served as new salem's postmaster and later as county surveyor, but continued his voracious reading, and decided to become a lawyer.
he taught himself the law, with blackstone's "commentaries", saying later of the effort, "i studied with nobody."
lincoln's second state house campaign in 1834, this time as a whig, was a success over a powerful whig opponent.
then followed his four terms in the illinois house of representatives for sangamon county.
he championed construction of the illinois and michigan canal, and later was a canal commissioner.
he voted to expand suffrage beyond white landowners to all white males, but adopted a "free soil" stance opposing both slavery and abolition.
he echoed henry clay's support for the american colonization society which advocated a program of abolition in conjunction with settling freed slaves in liberia.
admitted to the illinois bar in 1836, he moved to springfield and began to practice law under john t. stuart, mary todd's cousin.
lincoln emerged as a formidable trial combatant during cross-examinations and closing arguments.
he partnered several years with stephen t. logan, and in 1844 began his practice with william herndon, "a studious young man".
true to his record, lincoln professed to friends in 1861 to be "an old line whig, a disciple of henry clay".
their party favored economic modernization in banking, tariffs to fund internal improvements including railroads, and urbanization.
lincoln not only pulled off his strategy of gaining the nomination in 1846, but also won election.
he was assigned to the committee on post office and post roads and the committee on expenditures in the war department.
he dropped the bill when it eluded whig support.
he supported the wilmot proviso, a failed proposal to ban slavery in any u.s. territory won from mexico.
lincoln emphasized his opposition to polk by drafting and introducing his spot resolutions.
lincoln demanded that polk show congress the exact spot on which blood had been shed and prove that the spot was on american soil.
the resolution was ignored in both congress and the national papers, and it cost lincoln political support in his district.
one illinois newspaper derisively nicknamed him "spotty lincoln".
lincoln later regretted some of his statements, especially his attack on presidential war-making powers.
lincoln had pledged in 1846 to serve only one term in the house.
realizing clay was unlikely to win the presidency, he supported general zachary taylor for the whig nomination in the 1848 presidential election.
taylor won and lincoln hoped in vain to be appointed commissioner of the general land office.
the administration offered to appoint him secretary or governor of the oregon territory as consolation.
in his springfield practice lincoln handled "every kind of business that could come before a prairie lawyer".
twice a year he appeared for 10 consecutive weeks in county seats in the midstate county courts; this continued for 16 years.
lincoln handled transportation cases in the midst of the nation's western expansion, particularly river barge conflicts under the many new railroad bridges.
as a riverboat man, lincoln initially favored those interests, but ultimately represented whoever hired him.
he later represented a bridge company against a riverboat company in a landmark case involving a canal boat that sank after hitting a bridge.
in 1849, he received a patent for a flotation device for the movement of boats in shallow water.
the idea was never commercialized, but it made lincoln the only president to hold a patent.
lincoln appeared before the illinois supreme court in 175 cases; he was sole counsel in 51 cases, of which 31 were decided in his favor.
from 1853 to 1860, one of his largest clients was the illinois central railroad.
his legal reputation gave rise to the nickname "honest abe".
lincoln argued in an 1858 criminal trial, defending william "duff" armstrong, who was on trial for the murder of james preston metzker.
the case is famous for lincoln's use of a fact established by judicial notice to challenge the credibility of an eyewitness.
armstrong was acquitted.
peter cartwright.
harrison was charged with the murder of greek crafton who, as he lay dying of his wounds, confessed to cartwright that he had provoked harrison.
lincoln angrily protested the judge's initial decision to exclude cartwright's testimony about the confession as inadmissible hearsay.
lincoln argued that the testimony involved a dying declaration and was not subject to the hearsay rule.
in his 1852 eulogy for clay, lincoln highlighted the latter's support for gradual emancipation and opposition to "both extremes" on the slavery issue.
the legislation alarmed many northerners, who sought to prevent the resulting spread of slavery, but douglas's kansas–nebraska act narrowly passed congress in may 1854.
lincoln did not comment on the act until months later in his "peoria speech" in october 1854.
lincoln then declared his opposition to slavery which he repeated en route to the presidency.
i cannot but hate it.
i hate it because of the monstrous injustice of slavery itself.
nationally, the whigs were irreparably split by the kansas–nebraska act and other efforts to compromise on the slavery issue.
lincoln held out hope for rejuvenating the whigs, though he lamented his party's growing closeness with the nativist know nothing movement.
in 1854 lincoln was elected to the illinois legislature but declined to take his seat.
the year's elections showed the strong opposition to the kansas–nebraska act, and in the aftermath, lincoln sought election to the united states senate.
at that time, senators were elected by the state legislature.
after leading in the first six rounds of voting, he was unable to obtain a majority.
lincoln instructed his backers to vote for lyman trumbull.
lincoln's decision to withdraw enabled his whig supporters and trumbull's antislavery democrats to combine and defeat the mainstream democratic candidate, joel aldrich matteson.
violent political confrontations in kansas continued, and opposition to the kansas–nebraska act remained strong throughout the north.
as the 1856 elections approached, lincoln joined the republicans and attended the bloomington convention, which formally established the illinois republican party.
the convention platform endorsed congress's right to regulate slavery in the territories and backed the admission of kansas as a free state.
lincoln gave the final speech of the convention supporting the party platform and called for the preservation of the union.
the democrats nominated former secretary of state james buchanan and the know-nothings nominated former whig president millard fillmore.
buchanan prevailed, while republican william henry bissell won election as governor of illinois, and lincoln became a leading republican in illinois.
dred scott was a slave whose master took him from a slave state to a free territory under the missouri compromise.
after scott was returned to the slave state he petitioned a federal court for his freedom.
his petition was denied in "dred scott v. sandford" (1857).
supreme court chief justice roger b. taney in the decision wrote that blacks were not citizens and derived no rights from the constitution.
while many democrats hoped that "dred scott" would end the dispute over slavery in the territories, the decision sparked further outrage in the north.
lincoln denounced it as the product of a conspiracy of democrats to support the slave power.
in 1858 douglas was up for re-election in the u.s. senate, and lincoln hoped to defeat him.
some eastern republicans supported douglas from his opposition to the lecompton constitution and admission of kansas as a slave state.
many illinois republicans resented this eastern interference.
for the first time, illinois republicans held a convention to agree upon a senate candidate, and lincoln won the nomination with little opposition.
accepting the nomination, lincoln delivered his house divided speech, with the biblical reference mark 3:25, "a house divided against itself cannot stand.
i believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free.
i do not expect the union to be dissolved—i do not expect the house to fall—but i do expect it will cease to be divided.
it will become all one thing, or all the other."
the speech created a stark image of the danger of disunion.
the stage was then set for the election of the illinois legislature which would, in turn, select lincoln or douglas.
the senate campaign featured seven debates between the two.
these were the most famous political debates in american history; they had an atmosphere akin to a prizefight and drew crowds in the thousands.
the principals stood in stark contrast both physically and politically.
douglas emphasized his freeport doctrine, that local settlers were free to choose whether to allow slavery, and accused lincoln of having joined the abolitionists.
lincoln's argument assumed a moral tone, as he claimed douglas represented a conspiracy to promote slavery.
douglas's argument was more legal, claiming that lincoln was defying the authority of the u.s. supreme court in the "dred scott" decision.
though the republican legislative candidates won more popular votes, the democrats won more seats, and the legislature re-elected douglas.
lincoln's articulation of the issues gave him a national political presence.
while lincoln was popular in the midwest, he lacked support in the northeast, and was unsure whether to seek the office.
he insisted that morality required opposition to slavery, and rejected any "groping for some middle ground between the right and the wrong".
many in the audience thought he appeared awkward and even ugly.
but lincoln demonstrated intellectual leadership that brought him into contention.
journalist noah brooks reported, "no man ever before made such an impression on his first appeal to a new york audience."
in response to an inquiry about his ambitions, lincoln said, "the taste "is" in my mouth a little."
on may 9–10, 1860, the illinois republican state convention was held in decatur.
lincoln's followers organized a campaign team led by david davis, norman judd, leonard swett, and jesse dubois, and lincoln received his first endorsement.
exploiting his embellished frontier legend (clearing land and splitting fence rails), lincoln's supporters adopted the label of "the rail candidate".
michael martinez wrote about the effective imaging of lincoln by his campaign.
at times he was presented as the plain-talking "rail splitter" and at other times he was "honest abe", unpolished but trustworthy.
on may 18, at the republican national convention in chicago, lincoln won the nomination on the third ballot, beating candidates such as seward and chase.
a former democrat, hannibal hamlin of maine, was nominated for vice president to balance the ticket.
pennsylvania put him over the top, led by the state's iron interests who were reassured by his tariff support.
lincoln's managers had focused on this delegation while honoring lincoln's dictate to "make no contracts that bind me".
as the slave power tightened its grip on the national government, most republicans agreed with lincoln that the north was the aggrieved party.
throughout the 1850s, lincoln had doubted the prospects of civil war, and his supporters rejected claims that his election would incite secession.
a group of former whigs and know nothings formed the constitutional union party and nominated john bell of tennessee.
lincoln and douglas competed for votes in the north, while bell and breckinridge primarily found support in the south.
lincoln's ideas of abolishing slavery grew, drawing more supporters.
people of the northern states knew the southern states would vote against lincoln and rallied supporters for lincoln.
as douglas and the other candidates campaigned, lincoln gave no speeches, relying on the enthusiasm of the republican party.
the party did the leg work that produced majorities across the north, and produced an abundance of campaign posters, leaflets, and newspaper editorials.
republican speakers focused first on the party platform, and second on lincoln's life story, emphasizing his childhood poverty.
on november 6, 1860, lincoln was elected the 16th president.
lincoln received 1,866,452 votes, or 39.8% of the total in a four-way race, carrying the free northern states, as well as california and oregon.
his victory in the electoral college was decisive: lincoln had 180 votes to 123 for his opponents.
in response to lincoln's election, secessionists implemented plans to leave the union before he took office in march 1861.
six of these states declared themselves to be a sovereign nation, the confederate states of america, and adopted a constitution.
president buchanan and president-elect lincoln refused to recognize the confederacy, declaring secession illegal.
the confederacy selected jefferson davis as its provisional president on february 9, 1861.
attempts at compromise followed but lincoln and the republicans rejected the proposed crittenden compromise as contrary to the party's platform of free-soil in the territories.
lincoln tacitly supported the corwin amendment to the constitution, which passed congress and was awaiting ratification by the states when lincoln took office.
that doomed amendment would have protected slavery in states where it already existed.
a few weeks before the war, lincoln sent a letter to every governor informing them congress had passed a joint resolution to amend the constitution.
en route to his inauguration, lincoln addressed crowds and legislatures across the north.
the president-elect evaded suspected assassins in baltimore.
on february 23, 1861, he arrived in disguise in washington, d.c., which was placed under substantial military guard.
on april 12, 1861, confederate forces fired on union troops at fort sumter and began the fight.
but he also vowed not to surrender the forts.
the only resolution of these contradictory positions was for the confederates to fire the first shot; they did just that."
this call forced states to choose sides.
virginia seceded and was rewarded with the designation of richmond as the confederate capital, despite its exposure to union lines.
north carolina, tennessee, and arkansas followed over the following two months.
secession sentiment was strong in missouri and maryland, but did not prevail; kentucky remained neutral.
the fort sumter attack rallied americans north of the mason-dixon line to defend the nation.
as states sent union regiments south, on april 19, baltimore mobs in control of the rail links attacked union troops who were changing trains.
local leaders' groups later burned critical rail bridges to the capital and the army responded by arresting local maryland officials.
lincoln suspended the writ of "habeas corpus" where needed for the security of troops trying to reach washington.
in june taney, ruling only for the lower circuit court in ex parte merryman, issued the writ which he felt could only be suspended by congress.
lincoln persisted with the policy of suspension in select areas.
lincoln took executive control of the war and shaped the union military strategy.
he responded to the unprecedented political and military crisis as commander-in-chief by exercising unprecedented authority.
lincoln gained the support of congress and the northern public for these actions.
lincoln also had to reinforce union sympathies in the border slave states and keep the war from becoming an international conflict.
copperheads criticized lincoln for refusing to compromise on slavery.
the radical republicans criticized him for moving too slowly in abolishing slavery.
on august 6, 1861, lincoln signed the confiscation act that authorized judicial proceedings to confiscate and free slaves who were used to support the confederates.
the law had little practical effect, but it signaled political support for abolishing slavery.
in august 1861, general john c. frémont, the 1856 republican presidential nominee, without consulting washington, issued a martial edict freeing slaves of the rebels.
lincoln canceled the illegal proclamation as politically motivated and lacking military necessity.
as a result, union enlistments from maryland, kentucky, and missouri increased by over 40,000.
internationally, lincoln wanted to forestall foreign military aid to the confederacy.
he relied on his combative secretary of state william seward while working closely with senate foreign relations committee chairman charles sumner.
lincoln ended the crisis by releasing the two diplomats.
biographer james g. randall dissected lincoln's successful techniques: lincoln painstakingly monitored the telegraph reports coming into the war department.
he tracked all phases of the effort, consulting with governors, and selecting generals based on their success, their state, and their party.
in january 1862, after complaints of inefficiency and profiteering in the war department, lincoln replaced war secretary simon cameron with edwin stanton.
stanton centralized the war department's activities, auditing and canceling contracts, saving the federal government $17,000,000.
stanton was a staunch unionist, pro-business, conservative democrat who gravitated toward the radical republican faction.
he worked more often and more closely with lincoln than any other senior official.
"stanton and lincoln virtually conducted the war together", say thomas and hyman.
lincoln's war strategy embraced two priorities: ensuring that washington was well-defended and conducting an aggressive war effort for a prompt, decisive victory.
twice a week, lincoln met with his cabinet in the afternoon.
occasionally mary prevailed on him to take a carriage ride, concerned that he was working too hard.
lincoln began to appreciate the critical need to control strategic points, such as the mississippi river.
lincoln saw the importance of vicksburg and understood the necessity of defeating the enemy's army, rather than simply capturing territory.
after the union rout at bull run and winfield scott's retirement, lincoln appointed major general george b. mcclellan general-in-chief.
mcclellan then took months to plan his virginia peninsula campaign.
mcclellan's slow progress frustrated lincoln, as did his position that no troops were needed to defend washington.
mcclellan, in turn, blamed the failure of the campaign on lincoln's reservation of troops for the capitol.
in 1862 lincoln removed mcclellan for the general's continued inaction.
he elevated henry halleck in july and appointed john pope as head of the new army of virginia.
pope satisfied lincoln's desire to advance on richmond from the north, thus protecting washington from counterattack.
despite his dissatisfaction with mcclellan's failure to reinforce pope, lincoln restored him to command of all forces around washington.
two days after mcclellan's return to command, general robert e. lee's forces crossed the potomac river into maryland, leading to the battle of antietam.
that battle, a union victory, was among the bloodiest in american history; it facilitated lincoln's emancipation proclamation in january.
lincoln replaced buell with william rosecrans; and after the 1862 midterm elections he replaced mcclellan with ambrose burnside.
the appointments were both politically neutral and adroit on lincoln's part.
burnside, against presidential advice, launched an offensive across the rappahannock river and was defeated by lee at fredericksburg in december.
desertions during 1863 came in the thousands and only increased after fredericksburg, so lincoln replaced burnside with joseph hooker.
hooker was routed by lee at the battle of chancellorsville in may, then resigned and was replaced by george meade.
meade followed lee north into pennsylvania and beat him in the gettysburg campaign, but then failed to follow up despite lincoln's demands.
at the same time, grant captured vicksburg and gained control of the mississippi river, splitting the far western rebel states.
the federal government's power to end slavery was limited by the constitution, which before 1865 delegated the issue to the individual states.
lincoln argued that slavery would be rendered obsolete if its expansion into new territories were prevented.
he sought to persuade the states to agree to compensation for emancipating their slaves in return for their acceptance of abolition.
in june 1862, congress passed an act banning slavery on all federal territory, which lincoln signed.
he felt such action could be taken only within the war powers of the commander-in-chief, which he planned to exercise.
lincoln at this time reviewed a draft of the emancipation proclamation with his cabinet.
privately, lincoln concluded that the confederacy's slave base had to be eliminated.
copperheads argued that emancipation was a stumbling block to peace and reunification; republican editor horace greeley of the "new york tribune" agreed.
with the abolition of slavery in the rebel states now a military objective, union armies advancing south liberated three million slaves.
enlisting former slaves became official policy.
by the spring of 1863, lincoln was ready to recruit black troops in more than token numbers.
by the end of 1863, at lincoln's direction, general lorenzo thomas had recruited 20 regiments of blacks from the mississippi valley.
the proclamation included lincoln's earlier plans for colonies for newly freed slaves, though that undertaking ultimately failed.
lincoln spoke at the dedication of the gettysburg battlefield cemetery on november 19, 1863.
he defined the war as dedicated to the principles of liberty and equality for all.
grant's victories at the battle of shiloh and in the vicksburg campaign impressed lincoln.
responding to criticism of grant after shiloh, lincoln had said, "i can't spare this man.
he fights."
with grant in command, lincoln felt the union army could advance in multiple theaters, while also including black troops.
meade's failure to capture lee's army after gettysburg and the continued passivity of the army of the potomac persuaded lincoln to promote grant to supreme commander.
grant then assumed command of meade's army.
lincoln was concerned that grant might be considering a presidential candidacy in 1864.
his nomination was confirmed by the senate on march 2, 1864.
grant in 1864 waged the bloody overland campaign, which exacted heavy losses on both sides.
grant's army moved steadily south.
lincoln traveled to grant's headquarters at city point, virginia to confer with grant and william tecumseh sherman.
lincoln reacted to union losses by mobilizing support throughout the north.
lincoln authorized grant to target infrastructure—plantations, railroads, and bridges—hoping to weaken the south's morale and fighting ability.
he emphasized defeat of the confederate armies over destruction (which was considerable) for its own sake.
lincoln's engagement became distinctly personal on one occasion in 1864 when confederate general jubal early raided washington, d.c..
as grant continued to weaken lee's forces, efforts to discuss peace began.
confederate vice president stephens led a group meeting with lincoln, seward, and others at hampton roads.
lincoln refused to negotiate with the confederacy as a coequal; his objective to end the fighting was not realized.
on april 1, 1865, grant nearly encircled petersburg in a siege.
the confederate government evacuated richmond and lincoln visited the conquered capital.
on april 9, lee surrendered to grant at appomattox, officially ending the war.
lincoln ran for reelection in 1864, while uniting the main republican factions, along with war democrats edwin m. stanton and andrew johnson.
lincoln used conversation and his patronage powers—greatly expanded from peacetime—to build support and fend off the radicals' efforts to replace him.
at its convention, the republicans selected johnson as his running mate.
to broaden his coalition to include war democrats as well as republicans, lincoln ran under the label of the new union party.
grant's bloody stalemates damaged lincoln's re-election prospects, and many republicans feared defeat.
meanwhile, lincoln emboldened grant with more troops and republican party support.
sherman's capture of atlanta in september and david farragut's capture of mobile ended defeatism.
the democratic party was deeply split, with some leaders and most soldiers openly for lincoln.
the national union party was united by lincoln's support for emancipation.
state republican parties stressed the perfidy of the copperheads.
on november 8, lincoln carried all but three states, including 78 percent of union soldiers.
on march 4, 1865, lincoln delivered his second inaugural address.
in it, he deemed the war casualties to be god's will.
when a general asked lincoln how the defeated confederates were to be treated, lincoln replied, "let 'em up easy."
lincoln was determined to find meaning in the war in its aftermath, and did not want to continue to outcast the southern states.
determined to reunite the nation and not alienate the south, lincoln urged that speedy elections under generous terms be held.
as southern states fell, they needed leaders while their administrations were restored.
in tennessee and arkansas, lincoln respectively appointed johnson and frederick steele as military governors.
democratic opponents accused lincoln of using the military to ensure his and the republicans' political aspirations.
the radicals denounced his policy as too lenient, and passed their own plan, the 1864 wade–davis bill, which lincoln vetoed.
the radicals retaliated by refusing to seat elected representatives from louisiana, arkansas, and tennessee.
lincoln's appointments were designed to harness both moderates and radicals.
after implementing the emancipation proclamation, lincoln increased pressure on congress to outlaw slavery throughout the nation with a constitutional amendment.
he declared that such an amendment would "clinch the whole matter" and by december 1863 an amendment was brought to congress.
this first attempt fell short of the required two-thirds majority in the house of representatives.
passage became part of the republican/unionist platform, and after a house debate the second attempt passed on january 31, 1865.
with ratification, it became the thirteenth amendment to the united states constitution on december 6, 1865.
lincoln believed the federal government had limited responsibility to the millions of freedmen.
he signed senator charles sumner's freedmen's bureau bill that set up a temporary federal agency designed to meet the immediate needs of former slaves.
the law opened land for a lease of three years with the ability to purchase title for the freedmen.
lincoln announced a reconstruction plan that involved short-term military control, pending readmission under the control of southern unionists.
historians agree that it is impossible to predict exactly how reconstruction would have proceeded had lincoln lived.
lincoln claimed indians were antagonistic toward his father, thomas lincoln, and his young family.
although lincoln was a veteran of the black hawk war, which was fought in wisconsin and illinois in 1832, he saw no significant action.
during his presidency, lincoln's policy toward indians was driven by politics.
he used the indian bureau as a source of patronage, making appointments to his loyal followers in minnesota and wisconsin.
he faced difficulties guarding western settlers, railroads, and telegraphs, from indian attacks.
some believed it was a conspiracy by the confederacy to launch a war on the northwestern front.
lincoln sent general john pope, the former head of the army of virginia, to minnesota as commander of the new department of the northwest.
lincoln ordered thousands of confederate prisoners of war sent by railroad to put down the sioux uprising.
when the confederates protested turning "pows" into indian fighters, lincoln revoked the policy.
pope fought against the indians mercilessly, even advocating their extinction.
he ordered indian farms and food supplies be destroyed, and indian warriors be killed.
aiding pope, minnesota congressman col. henry h. sibley led militiamen and regular troops to defeat the sioux at wood lake.
by october 9, pope considered the uprising to be ended; hostilities ceased on december 26.
lincoln personally reviewed each of 303 execution warrants for santee dakota convicted of killing innocent farmers; he approved 39 for execution (one was later reprieved).
lincoln responded, "i could not afford to hang men for votes."
in the selection and use of his cabinet, lincoln employed the strengths of his opponents in a manner that emboldened his presidency.
lincoln commented on his thought process, “we need the strongest men of the party in the cabinet.
we needed to hold our own people together.
i had looked the party over and concluded that these were the very strongest men.
then i had no right to deprive the country of their services.” goodwin described the group in her biography as a "team of rivals".
lincoln adhered to the whig theory of a presidency focused on executing laws while deferring to congress' responsibility for legislating.
lincoln vetoed only four bills, particularly the wade-davis bill with its harsh reconstruction program.
the 1862 homestead act made millions of acres of western government-held land available for purchase at low cost.
the 1862 morrill land-grant colleges act provided government grants for agricultural colleges in each state.
the pacific railway acts of 1862 and 1864 granted federal support for the construction of the united states' first transcontinental railroad, which was completed in 1869.
there were two measures passed to raise revenues for the federal government: tariffs (a policy with long precedent), and a federal income tax.
in 1861, lincoln signed the second and third morrill tariffs, following the first enacted by buchanan.
the revenue act of 1862 adopted rates that increased with income.
lincoln presided over the expansion of the federal government's economic influence in other areas.
the national banking act created the system of national banks.
the us issued paper currency for the first time, known as greenbacks—printed in green on the reverse side.
in 1862, congress created the department of agriculture.
lincoln attacked the media for such behavior, and ordered a military seizure of the two papers which lasted for two days.
lincoln is largely responsible for the thanksgiving holiday.
thanksgiving had become a regional holiday in new england in the 17th century.
it had been sporadically proclaimed by the federal government on irregular dates.
the prior proclamation had been during james madison's presidency 50 years earlier.
in 1863, lincoln declared the final thursday in november of that year to be a day of thanksgiving.
in june 1864, lincoln approved the yosemite grant enacted by congress, which provided unprecedented federal protection for the area now known as yosemite national park.
therefore we must take a man whose opinions are known."
lincoln made five appointments to the supreme court.
noah haynes swayne was an anti-slavery lawyer who was committed to the union.
samuel freeman miller supported lincoln in the 1860 election and was an avowed abolitionist.
david davis was lincoln's campaign manager in 1860 and had served as a judge in the illinois court circuit where lincoln practiced.
democrat stephen johnson field, a previous california supreme court justice, provided geographic and political balance.
finally, lincoln's treasury secretary, salmon p. chase, became chief justice.
lincoln believed chase was an able jurist, would support reconstruction legislation, and that his appointment united the republican party.
lincoln appointed 27 judges to the united states district courts but no judges to the united states circuit courts during his time in office.
west virginia was admitted to the union on june 20, 1863.
nevada, which became the third state in the far-west of the continent, was admitted as a free state on october 31, 1864.
after attending an april 11, 1865 speech in which lincoln promoted voting rights for blacks, booth hatched a plot to assassinate the president.
when booth learned of the lincolns' intent to attend a play with general grant, he planned to assassinate lincoln and grant at ford's theatre.
at the last minute, grant decided to go to new jersey to visit his children instead of attending the play.
lincoln's guest major henry rathbone momentarily grappled with booth, but booth stabbed him and escaped.
after being attended by doctor charles leale and two other doctors, lincoln was taken across the street to petersen house.
after remaining in a coma for eight hours, lincoln died at 7:22 am on april 15.
stanton saluted and said, "now he belongs to the ages."
lincoln's flag-enfolded body was then escorted in the rain to the white house by bareheaded union officers, while the city's church bells rang.
president johnson was sworn in the next morning.
secretary of war stanton had issued orders that booth be taken alive, so corbett was initially arrested for court martial.
after a brief interview, stanton declared him a patriot and dismissed the charge.
the caskets containing lincoln's body and the body of his son willie traveled for three weeks on the "lincoln special" funeral train.
the train followed a circuitous route from washington d.c. to springfield, illinois, stopping at many cities for memorials attended by hundreds of thousands.
many others gathered along the tracks as the train passed with bands, bonfires, and hymn singing or in silent grief.
poet walt whitman composed "when lilacs last in the dooryard bloom'd" to eulogize him, one of four poems he wrote about lincoln.
african-americans were especially moved; they had lost 'their moses'.
in a larger sense, the reaction was in response to the deaths of so many men in the war.
historians emphasized the widespread shock and sorrow, but noted that some lincoln haters celebrated his death.
as a young man, lincoln was a religious skeptic.
he was deeply familiar with the bible, quoting and praising it.
he was private about his position on organized religion and respected the beliefs of others.
he never made a clear profession of christian beliefs.
through his entire public career, lincoln had a proneness for quoting scripture.
his three most famous speeches – the house divided speech, the gettysburg address, and his second inaugural—each contain direct allusions to providence and quotes from scripture.
in the 1840s, lincoln subscribed to the doctrine of necessity, a belief that the human mind was controlled by a higher power.
with the death of his son edward in 1850 he more frequently expressed a dependence on god.
he never joined a church, although he frequently attended first presbyterian church with his wife beginning in 1852.
the death of son willie in february 1862 may have caused him to look toward religion for solace.
after willie's death, he questioned the divine necessity of the war's severity.
he wrote at this time that god "could have either saved or destroyed the union without a human contest.
yet the contest began.
and having begun, he could give the final victory to either side any day.
yet the contest proceeds."
lincoln did believe in an all-powerful god that shaped events and by 1865 was expressing those beliefs in major speeches.
now, at the end of three years struggle the nation's condition is not what either party, or any man devised, or expected.
god alone can claim it.
whither it is tending seems plain.
lincoln explains therein the cause, purpose, and result of the war was god's will.
on the day lincoln was assassinated, he reportedly told his wife he desired to visit the holy land.
lincoln is believed to have had depression, smallpox, and malaria.
he took blue mass pills, which contained mercury, to treat constipation.
it is unknown to what extent he may have suffered from mercury poisoning.
several claims have been made that lincoln's health was declining before the assassination.
these are often based on photographs of lincoln appearing to show weight loss and muscle wasting.
it is also suspected that he might have had a rare genetic disease such as marfan syndrome or multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2b.
lincoln called the declaration of independence—which emphasized freedom and equality for all—the "sheet anchor" of republicanism beginning in the 1850s.
he did this at a time when the constitution, which "tolerated slavery", was the focus of most political discourse.
instead of focusing on the legality of an argument, he focused on the moral basis of republicanism.
further, it was a national duty to ensure the republic stands in every state.
many soldiers and religious leaders from the north, though, felt the fight for liberty and freedom of slaves was ordained by their moral and religious beliefs.
in lincoln's first inaugural address, he explored the nature of democracy.
he denounced secession as anarchy, and explained that majority rule had to be balanced by constitutional restraints.
the successful reunification of the states had consequences for how people view the country.
the civil war was a significant force in the eventual dominance of the singular usage by the end of the 19th century.
between 1999 and 2011, lincoln, john f. kennedy, and ronald reagan have been the top-ranked presidents in eight surveys, according to gallup.
a 2004 study found that scholars in the fields of history and politics ranked lincoln number one, while legal scholars placed him second after george washington.
lincoln's assassination left him a national martyr.
he was viewed by abolitionists as a champion of human liberty.
republicans linked lincoln's name to their party.
many, though not all, in the south considered lincoln as a man of outstanding ability.
historians have said he was "a classical liberal" in the 19th-century sense.
franklin d. roosevelt, preparing america for war, used the words of the civil war president to clarify the threat posed by germany and japan.
americans asked, "what would lincoln do?"
he suggested that postmodernism and multiculturalism have diluted greatness as a concept.
in the cold war years, lincoln's image shifted to a symbol of freedom who brought hope to those oppressed by communist regimes.
by the late 1960s, some african american intellectuals, led by lerone bennett jr., rejected lincoln's role as the great emancipator.
bennett won wide attention when he called lincoln a white supremacist in 1968.
he noted that lincoln used ethnic slurs and told jokes that ridiculed blacks.
bennett argued that lincoln opposed social equality, and proposed sending freed slaves to another country.
lincoln became a favorite exemplar for liberal intellectuals across the world.
historian barry schwartz wrote in 2009 that lincoln's image suffered "erosion, fading prestige, benign ridicule" in the late 20th century.
in the 21st century, president barack obama named lincoln his favorite president and insisted on using lincoln's bible for his inaugural ceremonies.
lincoln has often been portrayed by hollywood, almost always in a flattering light.
lincoln's portrait appears on two denominations of united states currency, the penny and the $5 bill.
his likeness also appears on many postage stamps.
while he is usually portrayed bearded, he grew a beard in 1860 at the suggestion of 11-year-old grace bedell.
he was the first of 16 presidents to do so.
he has been memorialized in many town, city, and county names, including the capital of nebraska.
the united states navy is named after lincoln, the second navy ship to bear his name.
ford's theatre, among the top sites in washington, d.c., is across the street from petersen house (where he died).
memorials in springfield, illinois include abraham lincoln presidential library and museum, lincoln's home, as well as his tomb.
a portrait carving of lincoln appears with those of three other presidents on mount rushmore, which receives about 3 million visitors a year.
aristotle (; "aristotélēs", ; 384–322 bc) was a greek philosopher and polymath during the classical period in ancient greece.
taught by plato, he was the founder of the lyceum, the peripatetic school of philosophy, and the aristotelian tradition.
aristotle provided a complex synthesis of the various philosophies existing prior to him.
it was above all from his teachings that the west inherited its intellectual lexicon, as well as problems and methods of inquiry.
little is known about his life.
aristotle was born in the city of stagira in northern greece.
his father, nicomachus, died when aristotle was a child, and he was brought up by a guardian.
at seventeen or eighteen years of age he joined plato's academy in athens and remained there until the age of thirty-seven (c. 347 bc).
shortly after plato died, aristotle left athens and, at the request of philip ii of macedon, tutored alexander the great beginning in 343 bc.
he established a library in the lyceum which helped him to produce many of his hundreds of books on papyrus scrolls.
though aristotle wrote many elegant treatises and dialogues for publication, only around a third of his original output has survived, none of it intended for publication.
aristotle's views on physical science profoundly shaped medieval scholarship.
his works contain the earliest known formal study of logic, studied by medieval scholars such as peter abelard and john buridan.
aristotle's influence on logic also continued well into the 19th century.
aristotle was revered among medieval muslim scholars as "the first teacher" and among medieval christians like thomas aquinas as simply "the philosopher".
in general, the details of aristotle's life are not well-established.
the biographies written in ancient times are often speculative and historians only agree on a few salient points.
his father nicomachus was the personal physician to king amyntas of macedon.
both of aristotle's parents died when he was about thirteen, and proxenus of atarneus became his guardian.
although little information about aristotle's childhood has survived, he probably spent some time within the macedonian palace, making his first connections with the macedonian monarchy.
at the age of seventeen or eighteen, aristotle moved to athens to continue his education at plato's academy.
aristotle remained in athens for nearly twenty years before leaving in 348/47 bc.
aristotle then accompanied xenocrates to the court of his friend hermias of atarneus in asia minor.
while in lesbos, aristotle married pythias, either hermias's adoptive daughter or niece.
she bore him a daughter, whom they also named pythias.
in 343 bc, aristotle was invited by philip ii of macedon to become the tutor to his son alexander.
aristotle was appointed as the head of the royal academy of macedon.
during aristotle's time in the macedonian court, he gave lessons not only to alexander, but also to two other future kings: ptolemy and cassander.
aristotle encouraged alexander toward eastern conquest, and aristotle's own attitude towards persia was unabashedly ethnocentric.
by 335 bc, aristotle had returned to athens, establishing his own school there known as the lyceum.
aristotle conducted courses at the school for the next twelve years.
according to the "suda", he also had an "erômenos", palaephatus of abydus.
this period in athens, between 335 and 323 bc, is when aristotle is believed to have composed many of his works.
he wrote many dialogues, of which only fragments have survived.
near the end of his life, alexander and aristotle became estranged over alexander's relationship with persia and persians.
following alexander's death, anti-macedonian sentiment in athens was rekindled.
kant stated in the "critique of pure reason" that with aristotle logic reached its completion.
what we today call "aristotelian logic" with its types of syllogism (methods of logical argument), aristotle himself would have labelled "analytics".
the term "logic" he reserved to mean "dialectics".
most of aristotle's work is probably not in its original form, because it was most likely edited by students and later lecturers.
the "rhetoric" is not conventionally included, but it states that it relies on the "topics".
in book viii, he distinguishes the matter of the substance as the substratum, or the stuff of which it is composed.
the formula that gives the components is the account of the matter, and the formula that gives the differentia is the account of the form.
like his teacher plato, aristotle's philosophy aims at the universal.
for aristotle, "form" is still what phenomena are based on, but is "instantiated" in a particular substance.
plato argued that all things have a universal form, which could be either a property or a relation to other things.
when we look at an apple, for example, we see an apple, and we can also analyse a form of an apple.
in this distinction, there is a particular apple and a universal form of an apple.
plato argued that there are some universal forms that are not a part of particular things.
for example, it is possible that there is no particular good in existence, but "good" is still a proper universal form.
in addition, aristotle disagreed with plato about the location of universals.
so, according to aristotle, the form of apple exists within each apple, rather than in the world of the forms.
actuality is the fulfilment of the end of the potentiality.
referring then to our previous example, we could say that an actuality is when a plant does one of the activities that plants do.
then aristotle proceeds and concludes that the actuality is prior to potentiality in formula, in time and in substantiality.
since, according to plato there are two ideas: animal and biped, how then is man a unity?
however, according to aristotle, the potential being (matter) and the actual one (form) are one and the same.
aristotle uses induction from examples alongside deduction, whereas plato relies on deduction from "a priori" principles.
aristotle's "natural philosophy" spans a wide range of natural phenomena including those now covered by physics, biology and other natural sciences.
aristotle's work encompassed virtually all facets of intellectual inquiry.
aristotle makes philosophy in the broad sense coextensive with reasoning, which he also would describe as "science".
note, however, that his use of the term "science" carries a different meaning than that covered by the term "scientific method".
for aristotle, "all science ("dianoia") is either practical, poetical or theoretical" ("metaphysics" 1025b25).
in the empedoclean scheme, all matter was made of the four elements, in differing proportions.
aristotle's scheme added the heavenly aether, the divine substance of the heavenly spheres, stars and planets.
this would imply the equation incorrect in modern physics.
opinions have varied on whether aristotle intended to state quantitative laws.
henri carteron held the "extreme view" that aristotle's concept of force was basically qualitative, but other authors reject this.
aristotle's writings on motion remained influential until the early modern period.
aristotle suggested that the reason for anything coming about can be attributed to four different types of simultaneously active factors.
aristotle describes experiments in optics using a camera obscura in "problems", book 15.
the apparatus consisted of a dark chamber with a small aperture that let light in.
with it, he saw that whatever shape he made the hole, the sun's image always remained circular.
he also noted that increasing the distance between the aperture and the image surface magnified the image.
according to aristotle, spontaneity and chance are causes of some things, distinguishable from other types of cause such as simple necessity.
chance as an incidental cause lies in the realm of accidental things, "from what is spontaneous".
there is also more a specific kind of chance, which aristotle names "luck", that only applies to people's moral choices.
aristotle was one of the first people to record any geological observations.
he stated that geological change was too slow to be observed in one person's lifetime.
aristotle was the first person to study biology systematically, and biology forms a large part of his writings.
he spent two years observing and describing the zoology of lesbos and the surrounding seas, including in particular the pyrrha lagoon in the centre of lesbos.
aristotle reports on the sea-life visible from observation on lesbos and the catches of fishermen.
he describes the catfish, electric ray, and frogfish in detail, as well as cephalopods such as the octopus and paper nautilus.
his description of the hectocotyl arm of cephalopods, used in sexual reproduction, was widely disbelieved until the 19th century.
he gives accurate descriptions of the four-chambered fore-stomachs of ruminants, and of the ovoviviparous embryological development of the hound shark.
darwin, too, noted these sorts of differences between similar kinds of animal, but unlike aristotle used the data to come to the theory of evolution.
for aristotle, accidents, like heat waves in winter, must be considered distinct from natural causes.
aristotle did not do experiments in the modern sense.
he used the ancient greek term "pepeiramenoi" to mean observations, or at most investigative procedures like dissection.
this style is common in modern biology when large amounts of data become available in a new field, such as genomics.
it does not result in the same certainty as experimental science, but it sets out testable hypotheses and constructs a narrative explanation of what is observed.
in this sense, aristotle's biology is scientific.
among these correct predictions are the following.
brood size decreases with (adult) body mass, so that an elephant has fewer young (usually just one) per brood than a mouse.
as a final example, fecundity decreases with lifespan, so long-lived kinds like elephants have fewer young in total than short-lived kinds like mice.
animals came above plants, and these in turn were above minerals.
those with blood were divided into the live-bearing (mammals), and the egg-laying (birds, reptiles, fish).
those without blood were insects, crustacea (non-shelled – cephalopods, and shelled) and the hard-shelled molluscs (bivalves and gastropods).
he recognised that animals did not exactly fit into a linear scale, and noted various exceptions, such as that sharks had a placenta like the tetrapods.
to a modern biologist, the explanation, not available to aristotle, is convergent evolution.
he believed that purposive final causes guided all natural processes; this teleological view justified his observed data as an expression of formal design.
humans have a rational soul.
for aristotle, the soul is the form of a living being.
the ability to initiate movement (or in the case of plants, growth and chemical transformations, which aristotle considers types of movement).
in contrast to earlier philosophers, but in accordance with the egyptians, he placed the rational soul in the heart, rather than the brain.
notable is aristotle's division of sensation and thought, which generally differed from the concepts of previous philosophers, with the exception of alcmaeon.
in other words, a memory is a mental picture (phantasm) that can be recovered.
aristotle believed an impression is left on a semi-fluid bodily organ that undergoes several changes in order to make a memory.
a memory occurs when stimuli such as sights or sounds are so complex that the nervous system cannot receive all the impressions at once.
these changes are the same as those involved in the operations of sensation, aristotelian 'common sense', and thinking.
memory is of the past, prediction is of the future, and sensation is of the present.
retrieval of impressions cannot be performed suddenly.
a transitional channel is needed and located in our past experiences, both for our previous experience and present experience.
because aristotle believes people receive all kinds of sense perceptions and perceive them as impressions, people are continually weaving together new impressions of experiences.
to search for these impressions, people search the memory itself.
recollection occurs when one retrieved experience naturally follows another.
if the chain of "images" is needed, one memory will stimulate the next.
when people recall experiences, they stimulate certain previous experiences until they reach the one that is needed.
recollection is thus the self-directed activity of retrieving the information stored in a memory impression.
only humans can remember impressions of intellectual activity, such as numbers and words.
animals that have perception of time can retrieve memories of their past observations.
remembering involves only perception of the things remembered and of the time passed.
aristotle believed that past experiences are hidden within the mind.
a force operates to awaken the hidden material to bring up the actual experience.
aristotle describes sleep in "on sleep and wakefulness".
sleep takes place as a result of overuse of the senses or of digestion, so it is vital to the body.
while a person is asleep, the critical activities, which include thinking, sensing, recalling and remembering, do not function as they do during wakefulness.
since a person cannot sense during sleep they can not have desire, which is the result of sensation.
however, the senses are able to work during sleep, albeit differently, unless they are weary.
dreams do not involve actually sensing a stimulus.
in dreams, sensation is still involved, but in an altered manner.
when a person perceives a stimulus and the stimulus is no longer the focus of their attention, it leaves an impression.
however, during sleep the impressions made throughout the day are noticed as there are no new distracting sensory experiences.
so, dreams result from these lasting impressions.
since impressions are all that are left and not the exact stimuli, dreams do not resemble the actual waking experience.
during sleep, a person is in an altered state of mind.
aristotle compares a sleeping person to a person who is overtaken by strong feelings toward a stimulus.
this leads the person to believe the dream is real, even when the dreams are absurd in nature.
one component of aristotle's theory of dreams disagrees with previously held beliefs.
he claimed that dreams are not foretelling and not sent by a divine being.
aristotle reasoned naturalistically that instances in which dreams do resemble future events are simply coincidences.
aristotle claimed that a dream is first established by the fact that the person is asleep when they experience it.
secondly, any sensory experience that is perceived while a person is asleep does not qualify as part of a dream.
lastly, the images of dreams must be a result of lasting impressions of waking sensory experiences.
aristotle's practical philosophy covers areas such as ethics, politics, economics, and rhetoric.
aristotelian just war theory is not well regarded in the present day, especially his view that warfare was justified to enslave "natural slaves".
in aristotelian philosophy, the abolition of what he considers "natural slavery" would undermine civic freedom.
the pursuit of freedom is inseparable from pursuing mastery over "those who deserve to be slaves".
war to "avoid becoming enslaved to others" is justified as self-defense.
he wrote several treatises on ethics, including most notably, the "nicomachean ethics".
aristotle taught that virtue has to do with the proper function ("ergon") of a thing.
an eye is only a good eye in so much as it can see, because the proper function of an eye is sight.
in addition to his works on ethics, which address the individual, aristotle addressed the city in his work titled "politics".
aristotle considered the city to be a natural community.
aristotle's conception of the city is organic, and he is considered one of the first to conceive of the city in this manner.
the common modern understanding of a political community as a modern state is quite different from aristotle's understanding.
in "protrepticus", the character 'aristotle' states: aristotle made substantial contributions to economic thought, especially to thought in the middle ages.
in "politics", aristotle addresses the city, property, and trade.
in "politics", aristotle offers one of the earliest accounts of the origin of money.
money came into use because people became dependent on one another, importing what they needed and exporting the surplus.
for the sake of convenience, people then agreed to deal in something that is intrinsically useful and easily applicable, such as iron or silver.
aristotle's discussions on retail and interest was a major influence on economic thought in the middle ages.
it thus uses goods as a means to an end, rather than as an end unto itself.
he believed that retail trade was in this way unnatural.
similarly, aristotle considered making a profit through interest unnatural, as it makes a gain out of the money itself, and not from its use.
aristotle gave a summary of the function of money that was perhaps remarkably precocious for his time.
money thus allows for the association of different goods and makes them "commensurable".
he goes on to state that money is also useful for future exchange, making it a sort of security.
that is, "if we do not want a thing now, we shall be able to get it when we do want it".
aristotle also outlines two kinds of rhetorical proofs: "enthymeme" (proof by syllogism) and "paradeigma" (proof by example).
because of this, aristotle believed that each of the mimetic arts possesses what stephen halliwell calls "highly structured procedures for the achievement of their purposes."
for example, music imitates with the media of rhythm and harmony, whereas dance imitates with rhythm alone, and poetry with language.
the forms also differ in their object of imitation.
comedy, for instance, is a dramatic imitation of men worse than average; whereas tragedy imitates men slightly better than average.
lastly, the forms differ in their manner of imitation – through narrative or character, through change or no change, and through drama or no drama.
aristotle taught that tragedy is composed of six elements: plot-structure, character, style, thought, spectacle, and lyric poetry.
the characters in a tragedy are merely a means of driving the story; and the plot, not the characters, is the chief focus of tragedy.
tragedy is the imitation of action arousing pity and fear, and is meant to effect the catharsis of those same emotions.
aristotle concludes "poetics" with a discussion on which, if either, is superior: epic or tragic mimesis.
aristotle's analysis of procreation describes an active, ensouling masculine element bringing life to an inert, passive female element.
on this ground, proponents of feminist metaphysics have accused aristotle of misogyny and sexism.
more than 2300 years after his death, aristotle remains one of the most influential people who ever lived.
he contributed to almost every field of human knowledge then in existence, and he was the founder of many new fields.
according to the philosopher bryan magee, "it is doubtful whether any human being has ever known as much as he did".
as a result, kukkonen argues, any analysis of reality today "will almost certainly carry aristotelian overtones ... evidence of an exceptionally forceful mind."
jonathan barnes wrote that "an account of aristotle's intellectual afterlife would be little less than a history of european thought".
aristotle's pupil and successor, theophrastus, wrote the "history of plants", a pioneering work in botany.
theophrastus was much less concerned with formal causes than aristotle was, instead pragmatically describing how plants functioned.
the immediate influence of aristotle's work was felt as the lyceum grew into the peripatetic school.
aristotle's influence over alexander the great is seen in the latter's bringing with him on his expedition a host of zoologists, botanists, and researchers.
he had also learned a great deal about persian customs and traditions from his teacher.
after theophrastus, the lyceum failed to produce any original work.
though interest in aristotle's ideas survived, they were generally taken unquestioningly.
it is not until the age of alexandria under the ptolemies that advances in biology can be again found.
herophilus also distinguished between veins and arteries, noting that the latter pulse while the former do not.
ernst mayr states that there was "nothing of any real consequence in biology after lucretius and galen until the renaissance."
greek christian scribes played a crucial role in the preservation of aristotle by copying all the extant greek language manuscripts of the corpus.
philoponus questioned aristotle's teaching of physics, noting its flaws and introducing the theory of impetus to explain his observations.
aristotle was one of the most revered western thinkers in early islamic theology.
averroes, avicenna and alpharabius, who wrote on aristotle in great depth, also influenced thomas aquinas and other western christian scholastic philosophers.
alkindus greatly admired aristotle's philosophy, and averroes spoke of aristotle as the "exemplar" for all future philosophers.
medieval muslim scholars regularly described aristotle as the "first teacher".
these thinkers blended aristotelian philosophy with christianity, bringing the thought of ancient greece into the middle ages.
scholars such as boethius, peter abelard, and john buridan worked on aristotelian logic.
phyllis had secretly told alexander what to expect, and he witnessed phyllis proving that a woman's charms could overcome even the greatest philosopher's male intellect.
artists such as hans baldung produced a series of illustrations of the popular theme.
galileo used more doubtful arguments to displace aristotle's physics, proposing that bodies all fall at the same speed whatever their weight.
the 19th-century german philosopher friedrich nietzsche has been said to have taken nearly all of his political philosophy from aristotle.
it was martin heidegger, not nietzsche, who elaborated a new interpretation of aristotle, intended to warrant his deconstruction of scholastic and philosophical tradition.
during the 20th century, aristotle's work was widely criticized.
the philosopher bertrand russell argued that "almost every serious intellectual advance has had to begin with an attack on some aristotelian doctrine".
russell called aristotle's ethics "repulsive", and labelled his logic "as definitely antiquated as ptolemaic astronomy".
russell stated that these errors made it difficult to do historical justice to aristotle, until one remembered what an advance he made upon all of his predecessors.
biologists continue to be interested in aristotle's thinking.
the works of aristotle that have survived from antiquity through medieval manuscript transmission are collected in the corpus aristotelicum.
these texts, as opposed to aristotle's lost works, are technical philosophical treatises from within aristotle's school.
aristotle wrote his works on papyrus scrolls, the common writing medium of that era.
aristotle's "lost" works stray considerably in characterization from the surviving aristotelian corpus.
whereas the lost works appear to have been originally written with a view to subsequent publication, the surviving works mostly resemble lecture notes not intended for publication.
cicero's description of aristotle's literary style as "a river of gold" must have applied to the published works, not the surviving notes.
the aristotle mountains in antarctica are named after aristotle.
aristoteles is a crater on the moon bearing the classical form of aristotle's name.
the secondary literature on aristotle is vast.
the following is only a small selection.
an american in paris is a jazz-influenced orchestral piece by american composer george gershwin first performed in 1928.
it was inspired by the time that gershwin had spent in paris and evokes the sights and energy of the french capital in the 1920s.
walter damrosch had asked gershwin to write a full concerto following the success of "rhapsody in blue" (1924).
gershwin scored the piece for the standard instruments of the symphony orchestra plus celesta, saxophones, and automobile horns.
he completed the orchestration on november 18, less than four weeks before the work's premiere.
he collaborated on the original program notes with critic and composer deems taylor.
gershwin called it "a rhapsodic ballet"; it is written freely and in a much more modern idiom than his prior works.
gershwin strongly encouraged ravel to come to the united states for a tour.
gershwin greeted ravel in new york in march 1928 during a party held for ravel's birthday by éva gauthier.
ravel's tour reignited gershwin's desire to return to paris, which he and his brother ira did after meeting ravel.
ravel's high praise of gershwin in an introductory letter to nadia boulanger caused gershwin to seriously consider taking much more time to study abroad in paris.
yet after he played for her, she told him she could not teach him.
boulanger gave gershwin basically the same advice she gave all her accomplished master students: "what could i give you that you haven't already got?"
paris at this time hosted many expatriate writers, among them ezra pound, w. b. yeats, ernest hemingway; and artist pablo picasso.
he described the piece as a "rhapsodic ballet" because it was written freely and is more modern than his previous works.
the piece is structured into five sections, which culminate in a loose aba format.
the style of this a section is written in the typical french style of composers claude debussy and les six.
this a section featured duple meter, singsong rhythms, and diatonic melodies with the sounds of oboe, english horn, and taxi horns.
the b section's "andante ma con ritmo deciso" introduces the american blues and spasms of homesickness.
the "allegro" that follows continues to express homesickness in a faster twelve-bar blues.
in the b section, gershwin uses common time, syncopated rhythms, and bluesy melodies with the sounds of trumpet, saxophone, and snare drum.
"moderato con grazia" is the last a section that returns to the themes set in a.
after recapitulating the "walking" themes, gershwin overlays the slow blues theme from section b in the final "grandioso".
gershwin did not particularly like walter damrosch's interpretation at the world premiere of "an american in paris".
he stated that damrosch's sluggish, dragging tempo caused him to walk out of the hall during a matinee performance of this work.
gershwin responded to the critics, "it's not a beethoven symphony, you know...
it's a humorous piece, nothing solemn about it.
it's not intended to draw tears.
if it pleases symphony audiences as a light, jolly piece, a series of impressions musically expressed, it succeeds."
the soprano saxophone doublings were eliminated to avoid changing instruments and the contrabassoon was also deleted.
william daly arranged the score for piano solo; this was published by new world music in 1929.
on september 22, 2013, it was announced that a musicological critical edition of the full orchestral score would be eventually released.
the score to "an american in paris" was scheduled to be issued first in a series of scores to be released.
two urtext editions of the work were published by the german publisher b-note music in 2015.
the changes made by campbell-watson were withdrawn in both editions.
in the extended urtext, 120 bars of music were re-integrated.
conductor walter damrosch had cut them shortly before the first performance.
this performance was of the original 1928 orchestration, except that it upheld the deletion of the contrabassoon part, an alteration usually attributed to f. campbell-watson.
"an american in paris" has been frequently recorded.
arthur fiedler and the boston pops orchestra recorded the work for rca victor, including one of the first stereo recordings of the music.
in 1951, metro-goldwyn-mayer released the musical film "an american in paris", featuring gene kelly and leslie caron.
the academy award for best production design recognizes achievement for art direction in film.
the category's original name was best art direction, but was changed to its current name in 2012 for the 85th academy awards.
this change resulted from the art director's branch of the academy of motion picture arts and sciences (ampas) being renamed the designer's branch.
since 1947, the award is shared with the set decorator(s).
it is awarded to the best interior design in a film.
in the lists below, the winner of the award for each year is shown first, followed by the other nominees in alphabetical order.
the academy awards, popularly known as the oscars, are awards for artistic and technical merit in the film industry.
it is regarded as the most famous and prestigious awards in the entertainment industry.
the statuette depicts a knight rendered in the art deco style.
the award was originally sculpted by george stanley from a design sketch by cedric gibbons.
the academy awards ceremony was first broadcast by radio in 1930 and was televised for the first time in 1953.
it is the oldest worldwide entertainment awards ceremony and is now televised live worldwide.
they are widely cited as the most famous and prestigious competitive awards in the field of entertainment.
the 92nd academy awards ceremony, honoring the best films of 2019, was held on february 9, 2020.
as with the previous ceremony, there was no host.
the ceremony was broadcast on abc.
it took place at the dolby theatre in los angeles, california, for the 18th consecutive year.
this ceremony marked the first time in oscar history that more than three films had received ten or more nominations.
a total of 3,140 oscar statuettes have been awarded since its inception in 1929.
the post-awards party was held at the mayfair hotel.
the cost of guest tickets for that night's ceremony was $5 ($ in 2020 dollars).
fifteen statuettes were awarded, honoring artists, directors and other participants in the film-making industry of the time, for their works during the 1927–28 period.
the ceremony ran for 15 minutes.
winners were announced to media three months earlier.
that was changed for the second ceremony in 1930.
since then, for the rest of the first decade, the results were given to newspapers for publication at 11:00 pm on the night of the awards.
the first best actor awarded was emil jannings, for his performances in "the last command" and "the way of all flesh".
with the fourth ceremony, however, the system changed, and professionals were honored for a specific performance in a single film.
for the first six ceremonies, the eligibility period spanned two calendar years.
at the 29th ceremony, held in 1957, the best foreign language film category, now known as best international feature film, was introduced.
until then, foreign-language films had been honored with the special achievement award.
the 74th academy awards, held in 2002, presented the first academy award for best animated feature.
since 1973, all academy awards ceremonies have ended with the academy award for best picture.
"parasite" became the first foreign-language film to win best picture at the february 9, 2020 award ceremony.
tom hanks announced at the 2020 oscar ceremony, the opening of the academy museum of motion pictures on december 14, 2020.
the museum development started in 2017 under kerry brougher, but is now led by bill kramer.
the best known award is the academy award of merit, more popularly known as the oscar statuette.
the five spokes represent the original branches of the academy: actors, writers, directors, producers, and technicians.
sculptor george stanley (who also did the muse fountain at the hollywood bowl) sculpted cedric gibbons' design.
the statuettes presented at the initial ceremonies were gold-plated solid bronze.
due to a metal shortage during world war ii, oscars were made of painted plaster for three years.
following the war, the academy invited recipients to redeem the plaster figures for gold-plated metal ones.
the only addition to the oscar since it was created is a minor streamlining of the base.
the original oscar mold was cast in 1928 at the c.w.
shumway & sons foundry in batavia, illinois, which also contributed to casting the molds for the vince lombardi trophy and emmy award's statuettes.
from 1983 to 2015, approximately 50 oscars in a tin alloy with gold plating were made each year in chicago by illinois manufacturer r.s.
owens & company.
it would take between three and four weeks to manufacture 50 statuettes.
while based on a digital scan of an original 1929 oscar, the statuettes retain their modern-era dimensions and black pedestal.
cast in liquid bronze from 3d-printed ceramic molds and polished, they are then electroplated in 24-karat gold by brooklyn, new york–based epner technology.
the time required to produce 50 such statuettes is roughly three months.
owens is expected to continue producing other awards for the academy and service existing oscars that need replating.
the academy officially adopted the name "oscar" for the trophies in 1939.
however, the origin of the nickname is disputed.
columnist sidney skolsky, who was present during herrick's naming in 1931, wrote that "employees have affectionately dubbed their famous statuette 'oscar.'"
the 1934 awards appeared again in another early media mention of "oscar": a "time" magazine story.
in the ceremonies that year, walt disney was the first to thank the academy for his "oscar" during his acceptance speech.
to prevent information identifying the oscar winners from leaking ahead of the ceremony, oscar statuettes presented at the ceremony have blank baseplates.
until 2010, winners returned their statuettes to the academy and had to wait several weeks to have their names inscribed on their respective oscars.
the r.s.
owens company has engraved nameplates made before the ceremony, bearing the name of every potential winner.
the nameplates for the non-winning nominees are later recycled.
prior to 1950 oscar statuettes were (and remain) the property of the recipient.
since then the statuettes have been legally encumbered by the requirement that the statuette be first offered for sale back to the academy for us$1.
if a winner refuses to agree to this stipulation, then the academy keeps the statuette.
academy awards predating this agreement have been sold in public auctions and private deals for six-figure sums.
the academy earned enforcement of its statuette contract by gaining a permanent injunction against the sale.
russell defended his action, saying, "i don't know why anybody would be critical.
my wife's health is much more important than sentimental reasons.
the movie will be here, even if oscar isn't."
on december 20, 2011, it sold in an online auction for us$861,542 ($ million today).
some buyers have subsequently returned the statuettes to the academy, which keeps them in its treasury.
since 2004, academy award nomination results have been announced to the public in mid-january.
prior to that, the results were announced in early february.
the academy of motion picture arts and sciences (ampas), a professional honorary organization, maintains a voting membership of over 7,000 .
academy membership is divided into different branches, with each representing a different discipline in film production.
actors constitute the largest voting bloc, numbering 1,311 members (22 percent) of the academy's composition.
votes have been certified by the auditing firm pricewaterhousecoopers (and its predecessor price waterhouse) since the 7th academy awards in 1935.
all ampas members must be invited to join by the board of governors, on behalf of academy branch executive committees.
membership eligibility may be achieved by a competitive nomination or a member may submit a name based on other significant contributions to the field of motion pictures.
new membership proposals are considered annually.
the academy does not publicly disclose its membership, although as recently as 2007 press releases have announced the names of those who have been invited to join.
the 2007 release also stated that it has just under 6,000 voting members.
while the membership had been growing, stricter policies have kept its size steady since then.
33% of voting members are former nominees (14%) and winners (19%).
in may 2011, the academy sent a letter advising its 6,000 or so voting members that an online system for oscar voting would be implemented in 2013.
the best international feature film award does not require a u.s. release.
it requires the film to be submitted as its country's official selection.
the qualifying theatrical runs must meet the same requirements as those for non-documentary films regarding numbers and times of screenings.
second, there are multiple methods of qualification.
the main method is a week-long theatrical release in "either" los angeles county "or" new york city during the eligibility period.
the requirements for the qualifying theatrical run are also different from those for other awards.
only one screening per day is required.
foreign films must include english subtitles, and each country can submit only one film for consideration in the international feature film category per year.
since the 90th academy awards, presented in 2018, multi-part and limited series have been ineligible for the best documentary feature award.
the academy's announcement of the new rule made no direct mention of that film.
the form includes the production credits for all related categories.
then, each form is checked and put in a reminder list of eligible releases.
in late december, ballots, and copies of the reminder list of eligible releases are mailed to around 6,000 active members.
for most categories, members from each of the branches vote to determine the nominees only in their respective categories (i.e.
only directors vote for directors, writers for writers, actors for actors, etc.).
in the special case of best picture, all voting members are eligible to select the nominees.
in certain categories, including international feature film, documentary and animated feature, nominees are selected by special screening committees made up of members from all branches.
in most categories, the winner is selected from among the nominees by plurality voting of all members.
since 2009, the best picture winner has been chosen by instant runoff voting.
since 2013, re-weighted range voting has been used to select the nominees for the best visual effects.
the academy enforces rules to limit overt campaigning by its members so as to try to eliminate excesses and prevent the process from becoming undignified.
it has an awards czar on staff who advises members on allowed practices and levies penalties on offenders.
it is the culmination of the film awards season, which usually begins during november or december of the previous year.
this is an elaborate extravaganza, with the invited guests walking up the red carpet in the creations of the most prominent fashion designers of the day.
nbc regained the rights for five years then abc resumed broadcast duties in 1976 and its current contract with the academy runs through 2028.
the academy has also produced condensed versions of the ceremony for broadcast in international markets (especially those outside of the americas) in more desirable local timeslots.
by that time, the television rights to the academy awards had been sold in 50 countries.
another reason was because of the growing tv ratings success coinciding with the ncaa basketball tournament, which would cut into the academy awards audience.
(in 1976 and 1977, abc's regained oscars were moved from tuesday to monday and went directly opposite nbc's ncaa title game.)
the earlier date is also to the advantage of abc, as it now usually occurs during the highly profitable and important february sweeps period.
some years, the ceremony is moved into the first sunday of march to avoid a clash with the winter olympic games.
advertising is somewhat restricted, however, as traditionally no movie studios or competitors of official academy award sponsors may advertise during the telecast.
for many years the film industry opposed a sunday broadcast because it would cut into the weekend box office.
in 2010, the academy contemplated moving the ceremony even further back into january, citing tv viewers' fatigue with the film industry's long awards season.
furthermore, a january ceremony on sunday would clash with national football league playoff games.
in 2018, the academy announced that the ceremony would be moved from late february to mid february beginning with the 92nd academy awards in 2020.
this segment has drawn criticism over the years for the omission of some names.
this segment was later followed by a commercial break.
in terms of broadcast length, the ceremony generally averages three and a half hours.
the first oscars, in 1929, lasted 15 minutes.
at the other end of the spectrum, the 2002 ceremony lasted four hours and twenty-three minutes.
in 2010, the organizers of the academy awards announced winners' acceptance speeches must not run past 45 seconds.
in 2016, in a further effort to streamline speeches, winners' dedications were displayed on an on-screen ticker.
historically, the telecast's viewership is higher when box-office hits are favored to win the best picture award.
the best picture winner of that particular ceremony was another independent film ("no country for old men").
the 92nd academy awards drew an average of 23.6 million viewers—a new low.
copies are held on a variety of film, video, and digital formats.
in 1929, the first academy awards were presented at a banquet dinner at the hollywood roosevelt hotel.
from 1930 to 1943, the ceremony alternated between two venues: the ambassador hotel on wilshire boulevard and the biltmore hotel in downtown los angeles.
grauman's chinese theatre in hollywood then hosted the awards from 1944 to 1946, followed by the shrine auditorium in los angeles from 1947 to 1948.
the 21st academy awards in 1949 were held at the academy award theatre at what had been the academy's headquarters on melrose avenue in hollywood.
from 1950 to 1960, the awards were presented at hollywood's pantages theatre.
the oscars moved to the santa monica civic auditorium in santa monica, california, in 1961.
in the late 1990s and early 2000s, the ceremony returned to the shrine.
in 2002, hollywood's dolby theatre (previously known as the kodak theatre) became the presentation's current venue.
in the first year of the awards, the best directing award was split into two categories (drama and comedy).
at times, the best original score award has also been split into separate categories (drama and comedy/musical).
prior to 2012, the production design award was called art direction, while the makeup and hairstyling award was called makeup.
following dissent from academy members, they announced that they would indeed air all 24 categories live.
this followed a number of proposals (among them, the introduction of a popular film category) that the academy had announced but did not implement.
the board of governors meets each year and considers new award categories.
they are not always presented on an annual basis.
this has generated accusations of the academy awards being influenced more by marketing than by quality.
these campaigns are intended to spread negative perceptions of other movies nominated and are believed to be perpetrated by those that were involved in creating the movie.
examples of whisper campaigns include the allegations against "zero dark thirty" suggesting that it justifies torture and the claim that "lincoln" distorts history.
the oscars have been infamously known for selecting specific genres of movies to be awarded.
the term 'oscar bait' was coined to describe such movies.
the academy awards have long received criticism over its lack of diversity among the nominees.
more white actresses have won oscars for yellowface portrayals of asian characters than actual asian actresses.
in response, the academy initiated "historic" changes in membership by the year 2020.
some winners critical of the academy awards have boycotted the ceremonies and refused to accept their oscars.
the first to do so was screenwriter dudley nichols (best writing in 1935 for "the informer").
nichols boycotted the 8th academy awards ceremony because of conflicts between the academy and the writers' guild.
nichols eventually accepted the 1935 award three years later, at the 1938 ceremony.
nichols was nominated for three further academy awards during his career.
george c. scott became the second person to refuse his award (best actor in 1970 for "patton") at the 43rd academy awards ceremony.
scott described it as a "meat parade", saying, "i don't want any part of it."
the proper winner was announced after the acceptance speeches by "la la land" producers fred berger, jordan horowitz and marc platt.
the following year, beatty and dunaway were invited back as presenters of the best picture award, which they accomplished without error.
in recent years, these gifts have also been extended to award nominees and winners.
the value of each of these gift bags can reach into the tens of thousands of dollars.
in 2014, the value was reported to be as high as us$80,000.
the value has risen to the point where the u.s. internal revenue service issued a statement regarding the gifts and their taxable status.
celebrities visiting the gifting suite included judith hoag, carolyn hennesy, kate linder, chris mulkey, jim o'heir, and john salley.
from 2006 onwards, results are live+sd; all previous years are live viewing.
by josep maria benet i jornet.
the film has no male actors, with all roles played by females.
the film was produced in 1996.
"actrius" screened in 2001 at the grauman's egyptian theatre in an american cinematheque retrospective of the works of its director.
the film had first screened at the same location in 1998.
it was also shown at the 1997 stockholm international film festival.
animalia is an illustrated children's book by graeme base.
it was originally published in 1986, followed by a tenth anniversary edition in 1996, and a 25th anniversary edition in 2012.
over four million copies have been sold worldwide.
a special numbered and signed anniversary edition was also published in 1996, with an embossed gold jacket.
"animalia" is an alliterative alphabet book and contains twenty-six illustrations, one for each letter of the alphabet.
each illustration features an animal from the animal kingdom (a is for alligator, b is for butterfly, etc.)
along with a short poem utilizing the letter of the page for many of the words.
the illustrations contain many other objects beginning with that letter that the reader can try to identify.
as an additional challenge, the author has hidden a picture of himself as a child in every picture.
julia macrae books published an "animalia" colouring book in 2008.
h. n. abrams also published a wall calendar colouring book version for children the same year.
the great american puzzle factory created a 300-piece jigsaw puzzle based on the book's cover.
it also airs on minimax for the czech republic and slovakia.
and recently in greece on the channel et1.
the australian children's television foundation released a teaching resource dvd-rom in 2011 to accompany the tv series with teaching aids for classroom use.
in 2010, the base factory and appbooks released animalia as an application for ipad and iphone/ipod touch.
"animalia" won the young australian's best book award in 1987 for best picture story book.
the children's book council of australia designated "animalia" a 1987 : honour book.
kid's own australian literature awards named "animalia" the 1988 picture book winner.
it is the principal realisation of terrestrial time (with a fixed offset of epoch).
it is also the basis for coordinated universal time (utc), which is used for civil timekeeping all over the earth's surface.
, when another leap second was added, tai is exactly 37 seconds ahead of utc.
the 37 seconds results from the initial difference of 10 seconds at the start of 1972, plus 27 leap seconds in utc since 1972.
tai may be reported using traditional means of specifying days, carried over from non-uniform time standards based on the rotation of the earth.
specifically, both julian days and the gregorian calendar are used.
tai is a weighted average of the time kept by over 400 atomic clocks in over 50 national laboratories worldwide.
the majority of the clocks involved are caesium clocks; the international system of units (si) definition of the second is based on caesium.
the clocks are compared using gps signals and two-way satellite time and frequency transfer.
due to the signal averaging tai is an order of magnitude more stable than its best constituent clock.
the participating institutions each broadcast, in real time, a frequency signal with timecodes, which is their estimate of tai.
time codes are usually published in the form of utc, which differs from tai by a well-known integer number of seconds.
the tai form may be denoted "tai(npl)".
the clocks at different institutions are regularly compared against each other.
this combined time scale is published monthly in "circular t", and is the canonical tai.
the same circular also gives tables of tai − ta("k"), for the various unsynchronised atomic time scales.
in hindsight, it is possible to discover errors in tai and to make better estimates of the true proper time scale.
early atomic time scales consisted of quartz clocks with frequencies calibrated by a single atomic clock; the atomic clocks were not operated continuously.
atomic timekeeping services started experimentally in 1955, using the first caesium atomic clock at the national physical laboratory, uk (npl).
the si second was defined in terms of the caesium atom in 1967.
because the clocks were, on average, well above sea level, this meant that tai slowed by about one part in a trillion.
all three of these time scales were defined to read jd 2443144.5003725 (1 january 1977 00:00:32.184) exactly at that instant.
utc is a discontinuous time scale.
it is regularly adjusted by leap seconds.
between these adjustments, it is composed of segments that are linear transformations of atomic time.
from its beginning in 1961 through december 1971, the adjustments were made regularly in fractional leap seconds so that utc approximated ut2.
afterwards, these adjustments were made only in whole seconds to approximate ut1.
altruism is the principle and moral practice of concern for happiness of other human beings or animals, resulting in a quality of life both material and spiritual.
in an extreme case, altruism may become a synonym of selflessness, which is the opposite of selfishness.
the word "altruism" was coined by the french philosopher auguste comte in french, as "altruisme", for an antonym of egoism.
in one sense, the opposite of altruism is spite; a spiteful action harms another with no self-benefit.
altruism can be distinguished from feelings of loyalty, in that whilst the latter is predicated upon social relationships, altruism does not consider relationships.
much debate exists as to whether ""true"" altruism is possible in human psychology.
the validity of this argument depends on whether intrinsic rewards qualify as "benefits".
the term "altruism" may also refer to an ethical doctrine that claims that individuals are morally obliged to benefit others.
used in this sense, it is usually contrasted with egoism, which claims individuals are morally obligated to serve themselves first.
effective altruism is the use of evidence and reason to determine the most effective ways to benefit others.
the concept has a long history in philosophical and ethical thought.
whilst ideas about altruism from one field can affect the other fields, the different methods and focuses of these fields always lead to different perspectives on altruism.
in simple terms, altruism is caring about the welfare of other people and acting to help them.
marcel mauss's book "the gift" contains a passage called "note on alms".
this note describes the evolution of the notion of alms (and by extension of altruism) from the notion of sacrifice.
this is the ancient morality of the gift, which has become a principle of justice.
theories of apparently altruistic behavior were accelerated by the need to produce theories compatible with evolutionary origins.
two related strands of research on altruism have emerged from traditional evolutionary analyses and from evolutionary game theory a mathematical model and analysis of behavioural strategies.
instead, evolution has shaped psychological mechanisms, such as emotions, that promote altruistic behaviors.
the benefits for the altruist may be increased and the costs reduced by being more altruistic towards certain groups.
an interesting example of altruism is found in the cellular slime moulds, such as "dictyostelium mucoroides".
jorge moll and jordan grafman, neuroscientists at the national institutes of health and labs-d'or hospital network (j.m.)
provided the first evidence for the neural bases of altruistic giving in normal healthy volunteers, using functional magnetic resonance imaging.
these structures are intimately related to social attachment and bonding in other species.
altruism, the experiment suggested, was not a superior moral faculty that suppresses basic selfish urges but rather was basic to the brain, hard-wired and pleasurable.
one brain region, the subgenual anterior cingulate cortex/basal forebrain, contributes to learning altruistic behavior, especially in those with trait empathy.
the same study has shown a connection between giving to charity and the promotion of social bonding.
without that awareness, people relying exclusively on reasoning seem to find it harder to sort their way through moral thickets.
does that mean they should be held to different standards of accountability?"
the international encyclopedia of the social sciences defines "psychological altruism" as "a motivational state with the goal of increasing another's welfare".
psychological altruism is contrasted with "psychological egoism", which refers to the motivation to increase one's own welfare.
there has been some debate on whether or not humans are truly capable of psychological altruism.
some definitions specify a self-sacrificial nature to altruism and a lack of external rewards for altruistic behaviors.
however, because altruism ultimately benefits the self in many cases, the selflessness of altruistic acts is brought to question.
the social exchange theory postulates that altruism only exists when benefits to the self outweigh costs to the self.
daniel batson is a psychologist who examined this question and argues against the social exchange theory.
altruism that ultimately serves selfish gains is thus differentiated from selfless altruism, but the general conclusion has been that empathy-induced altruism can be genuinely selfless.
the "empathy-altruism hypothesis" basically states that psychological altruism does exist and is evoked by the empathic desire to help someone who is suffering.
feelings of empathic concern are contrasted with feelings of personal distress, which compel people to reduce their own unpleasant emotions.
helping behavior is seen in humans at about two years old, when a toddler is capable of understanding subtle emotional cues.
research also suggests that the number of bystanders witnessing distress or suffering affects the likelihood of helping (the "bystander effect").
greater numbers of bystanders decrease individual feelings of responsibility.
however, a witness with a high level of empathic concern is likely to assume personal responsibility entirely regardless of the number of bystanders.
after controlling for prior health status, it was determined that volunteerism accounted for a 44% reduction in mortality.
merely being aware of kindness in oneself and others is also associated with greater well-being.
a study that asked participants to count each act of kindness they performed for one week significantly enhanced their subjective happiness.
the relationship between altruistic behavior and happiness is bidirectional.
studies have found that generosity increases linearly from sad to happy affective states.
studies have also been careful to note that feeling over-taxed by the needs of others has conversely negative effects on health and happiness.
additionally, while generous acts make people feel good about themselves, it is also important for people to appreciate the kindness they receive from others.
studies suggest that gratitude goes hand-in-hand with kindness and is also very important for our well-being.
"sociologists have long been concerned with how to build the good society" ("altruism, morality, and social solidarity".
american sociological association.).
the motivation of altruism is also the focus of study; some publications link the occurrence of moral outrage to the punishment of perpetrators and compensation of victims.
studies have shown that generosity in laboratory and in online experiments is contagious – people imitate observed generosity of others.
pathological altruism is when altruism is taken to an unhealthy extreme, and either harms the altruistic person, or well-intentioned actions cause more harm than good.
the term "pathological altruism" was popularised by the book "pathological altruism".
most, if not all, of the world's religions promote altruism as a very important moral value.
buddhism, christianity, hinduism, islam, jainism, judaism, and sikhism, etc., place particular emphasis on altruistic morality.
altruism figures prominently in buddhism.
"many illnesses can be cured by the one medicine of love and compassion.
these qualities are the ultimate source of human happiness, and the need for them lies at the very core of our being" (dalai lama).
the fundamental principles of jainism revolve around the concept of altruism, not only for humans but for all sentient beings.
jainism preaches the view of "ahimsa" – to live and let live, thereby not harming sentient beings, i.e.
uncompromising reverence for all life.
it also considers all living things to be equal.
jainism prescribes a path of non-violence to progress the soul to this ultimate goal.
a major characteristic of jain belief is the emphasis on the consequences of not only physical but also mental behaviors.
one's unconquered mind with anger, pride (ego), deceit, greed and uncontrolled sense organs are the powerful enemies of humans.
anger spoils good relations, pride destroys humility, deceit destroys peace and greed destroys everything.
jainism recommends conquering anger by forgiveness, pride by humility, deceit by straightforwardness and greed by contentment.
jains believe that to attain enlightenment and ultimately liberation, one must practice the following ethical principles (major vows) in thought, speech and action.
the degree to which these principles are practiced is different for householders and monks.
they are: the "great vows" (mahavrata) are prescribed for monks and "limited vows" (anuvrata) are prescribed for householders.
the house-holders are encouraged to practice the above-mentioned five vows.
the monks have to observe them very strictly.
with consistent practice, it will be possible to overcome the limitations gradually, accelerating the spiritual progress.
the principle of non-violence seeks to minimize karmas which limit the capabilities of the soul.
jainism views every soul as worthy of respect because it has the potential to become "siddha" (god in jainism).
because all living beings possess a soul, great care and awareness is essential in one's actions.
jainism emphasizes the equality of all life, advocating harmlessness towards all, whether the creatures are great or small.
this policy extends even to microscopic organisms.
jainism acknowledges that every person has different capabilities and capacities to practice and therefore accepts different levels of compliance for ascetics and householders.
altruism is central to the teachings of jesus found in the gospel, especially in the sermon on the mount and the sermon on the plain.
st thomas aquinas interprets 'you should love your neighbour as yourself' as meaning that love for ourselves is the exemplar of love for others.
in coining the word altruism, as stated above, comte was probably opposing this thomistic doctrine, which is present in some theological schools within catholicism.
many biblical authors draw a strong connection between love of others and love of god.
thomas jay oord has argued in several books that altruism is but one possible form of love.
an altruistic action is not always a loving action.
german philosopher max scheler distinguishes two ways in which the strong can help the weak.
in islam, the concept 'ithaar' (إيثار) (altruism) is the notion of 'preferring others to oneself'.
god) on the human body, considered to be property of allah alone.
the importance lies in sacrifice for the sake of the greater good; islam considers those practicing eyaar as abiding by the highest degree of nobility.
this is similar to the notion of chivalry, but unlike that european concept, in i'thar attention is focused on everything in existence.
a constant concern for allah results in a careful attitude towards people, animals, and other things in this world.
this concept was emphasized by sufis of islam like rabia al-adawiyya who paid attention to the difference between dedication to allah and dedication to people.
for many muslims, i'thar must be practiced as a religious obligation during specific islamic holidays.
however, i'thar is also still an islamic ideal to which all muslims should strive to adhere at all times.
judaism defines altruism as the desired goal of creation.
the famous rabbi abraham isaac kook stated that love is the most important attribute in humanity.
this is defined as bestowal, or giving, which is the intention of altruism.
this can be altruism towards humanity that leads to altruism towards the creator or god.
kabbalah defines god as the force of giving in existence.
modern kabbalah developed by rabbi yehuda ashlag, in his writings about the future generation, focuses on how society could achieve an altruistic social framework.
ashlag focused on society and its relation to divinity.
altruism is essential to the sikh religion.
the concept of "seva", or selfless service to the community for its own sake, is an important concept in sikhism.
the fifth nanak, guru arjun dev, sacrificed his life to uphold 22 carats of pure truth, the greatest gift to humanity, the guru granth.
the ninth guru, tegh bahadur, sacrificed his head to protect weak and defenseless people against atrocity.
he gave water to both friends and foes who were wounded on the battlefield.
some of the enemy began to fight again and some sikh warriors were annoyed by bhai kanhaiya as he was helping their enemy.
sikh soldiers brought bhai kanhaiya before guru gobind singh ji, and complained of his action that they considered counter-productive to their struggle on the battlefield.
"what were you doing, and why?"
asked the guru.
"i was giving water to the wounded because i saw your face in all of them", replied bhai kanhaiya.
the guru responded, "then you should also give them ointment to heal their wounds.
you were practicing what you were coached in the house of the guru."
it was under the tutelage of the guru that bhai kanhaiya subsequently founded a volunteer corps for altruism.
this volunteer corps still to date is engaged in doing good to others and trains new volunteering recruits for doing the same.
altruism is also the central act of various hindu mythology and religious poems and songs.
swami sivananda, an advaita scholar, reiterates the views in his commentary synthesising vedanta views on the brahma sutras, a vedantic text.
hence, karma cannot bestow the fruits of actions at a future date according to one's merit.
furthermore, one cannot argue that karma generates apurva or punya, which gives fruit.
since apurva is non-sentient, it cannot act unless moved by an intelligent being such as a god.
it cannot independently bestow reward or punishment.
altruistic acts are generally celebrated and very well received in hindu literature and is central to hindu morality.
there exists a wide range of philosophical views on humans' obligations or motivations to act altruistically.
proponents of ethical altruism maintain that individuals are morally obligated to act altruistically.
the opposing view is ethical egoism, which maintains that moral agents should always act in their own self-interest.
a related concept in descriptive ethics is psychological egoism, the thesis that humans always act in their own self-interest and that true altruism is impossible.
rational egoism is the view that rationality consists in acting in one's self-interest (without specifying how this affects one's moral obligations).
effective altruism is a philosophy and social movement that uses evidence and reasoning to determine the most effective ways to benefit others.
effective altruism encourages individuals to consider all causes and actions and to act in the way that brings about the greatest positive impact, based upon their values.
it is the broad, evidence-based and cause-neutral approach that distinguishes effective altruism from traditional altruism or charity.
effective altruism is part of the larger movement towards evidence-based practices.
the genes oxtr, cd38, comt, drd4, drd5, igf2, gabrb2 have been found to be candidate genes for altruism.
ayn rand (; born alisa zinovyevna rosenbaum; march 6, 1982) was a russian-american writer and philosopher.
she is known for her two best-selling novels, "the fountainhead" and "atlas shrugged", and for developing a philosophical system she named objectivism.
born and educated in russia, she moved to the united states in 1926.
she had a play produced on broadway in 1935 and 1936.
after two early novels that were initially unsuccessful, she achieved fame with her 1943 novel, "the fountainhead".
in 1957, rand published her best-known work, the novel "atlas shrugged".
afterward, she turned to non-fiction to promote her philosophy, publishing her own periodicals and releasing several collections of essays until her death in 1982.
rand advocated reason as the only means of acquiring knowledge and rejected faith and religion.
she supported rational and ethical egoism and rejected altruism.
in art, rand promoted romantic realism.
she was sharply critical of most philosophers and philosophical traditions known to her, except for aristotle, thomas aquinas and classical liberals.
literary critics received rand's fiction with mixed reviews and academia generally ignored or rejected her philosophy, though academic interest has increased in recent decades.
the objectivist movement attempts to spread her ideas, both to the public and in academic settings.
she has been a significant influence among libertarians and american conservatives.
rand was born alisa zinovyevna rosenbaum () on february 2, 1905, to a russian-jewish bourgeois family living in saint petersburg.
she was the eldest of three daughters of zinovy zakharovich rosenbaum and anna borisovna (née kaplan).
her father was an upwardly mobile pharmacist and her mother was socially ambitious and religiously observant.
rand later said she found school unchallenging and began writing screenplays at the age of eight and novels at the age of ten.
at the prestigious , her closest friend was vladimir nabokov's younger sister, olga.
she was twelve at the time of the february revolution of 1917, during which she favored alexander kerensky over tsar nicholas ii.
the subsequent october revolution and the rule of the bolsheviks under vladimir lenin disrupted the life the family had previously enjoyed.
while in high school, she concluded that she was an atheist and valued reason above any other human virtue.
after the russian revolution, universities were opened to women, allowing her to be in the first group of women to enroll at petrograd state university.
at the age of 16, she began her studies in the department of social pedagogy, majoring in history.
at the university she was introduced to the writings of aristotle and plato, who would be her greatest influence and counter-influence, respectively.
she also studied the philosophical works of friedrich nietzsche.
along with many other bourgeois students, she was purged from the university shortly before graduating.
she then studied for a year at the state technicum for screen arts in leningrad.
for an assignment, she wrote an essay about the polish actress pola negri, which became her first published work.
in late 1925, rand was granted a visa to visit relatives in chicago.
she departed on january 17, 1926.
she then left for hollywood, california.
she became a permanent american resident in july 1929 and an american citizen on march 3, 1931.
taking various jobs during the 1930s to support her writing, she worked for a time as the head of the costume department at rko studios.
she made several attempts to bring her parents and sisters to the united states, but they were unable to acquire permission to emigrate.
rand's first literary success came with the sale of her screenplay "red pawn" to universal studios in 1932, although it was never produced.
each night a jury was selected from members of the audience; based on the jury's vote, one of two different endings would be performed.
in 1941, paramount pictures produced a movie loosely based on the play.
rand did not participate in the production and was highly critical of the result.
"ideal" is a novel and play written in 1934 which were first published in 2015 by her estate.
the heroine is an actress who embodies randian ideals.
rand's first published novel, the semi-autobiographical "we the living", was published in 1936.
set in soviet russia, it focused on the struggle between the individual and the state.
in a 1959 foreword to the novel, rand stated that "we the living" "is as near to an autobiography as i will ever write.
it is not an autobiography in the literal, but only in the intellectual sense.
after the success of her later novels, rand was able to release a revised version in 1959 that has since sold over three million copies.
rediscovered in the 1960s, these films were re-edited into a new version which was approved by rand and re-released as "we the living" in 1986.
her novella "anthem" was written during a break from the writing of her next major novel, "the fountainhead".
it was published in england in 1938, but rand initially could not find an american publisher.
during the 1940s, rand became politically active.
she and her husband worked as full-time volunteers for the 1940 presidential campaign of republican wendell willkie.
this work led to rand's first public speaking experiences; she enjoyed fielding sometimes hostile questions from new york city audiences who had viewed pro-willkie newsreels.
this activity brought her into contact with other intellectuals sympathetic to free-market capitalism.
she became friends with journalist henry hazlitt and his wife, and hazlitt introduced her to the austrian school economist ludwig von mises.
despite her philosophical differences with them, rand strongly endorsed the writings of both men throughout her career, and both of them expressed admiration for her.
rand also became friends with libertarian writer isabel paterson.
while completing the novel, rand was prescribed the amphetamine benzedrine to fight fatigue.
her use of the drug for approximately three decades may have contributed to what some of her later associates described as volatile mood swings.
"the fountainhead" became a worldwide success, bringing rand fame and financial security.
in 1943, rand sold the rights for a film version to warner bros. and she returned to hollywood to write the screenplay.
finishing her work on that screenplay, she was hired by producer hal b. wallis as a screenwriter and script-doctor.
her work for wallis included the screenplays for the oscar-nominated "love letters" and "you came along".
rand also worked on other projects, including a planned nonfiction treatment of her philosophy to be called "the moral basis of individualism".
rand extended her involvement with free-market and anti-communist activism while working in hollywood.
she became involved with the motion picture alliance for the preservation of american ideals, a hollywood anti-communist group, and wrote articles on the group's behalf.
she also joined the anti-communist american writers association.
in 1947, during the second red scare, rand testified as a "friendly witness" before the united states house un-american activities committee.
her testimony described the disparity between her personal experiences in the soviet union and the portrayal of it in the 1944 film "song of russia".
rand argued that the film grossly misrepresented conditions in the soviet union, portraying life there as much better and happier than it actually was.
when asked after the hearings about her feelings on the effectiveness of the investigations, rand described the process as "futile".
after several delays, the film version of "the fountainhead" was released in 1949.
in the years following the publication of "the fountainhead", rand received numerous letters from readers, some of whom the book profoundly influenced.
in 1951, rand moved from los angeles to new york city, where she gathered a group of these admirers around her.
initially the group was an informal gathering of friends who met with rand on weekends at her apartment to discuss philosophy.
she later began allowing them to read the drafts of her new novel, "atlas shrugged", as the manuscript pages were written.
in 1954, rand's close relationship with the younger nathaniel branden turned into a romantic affair, with the "grudging consent" of their spouses.
"atlas shrugged", published in 1957, was considered rand's "magnum opus".
it advocates the core tenets of rand's philosophy of objectivism and expresses her concept of human achievement.
with this fictional strike, rand intended to illustrate that without the efforts of the rational and productive, the economy would collapse and society would fall apart.
despite many negative reviews, "atlas shrugged" became an international bestseller.
in an interview with mike wallace, rand declared herself "the most creative thinker alive".
however, rand was discouraged and depressed by the reaction of intellectuals to the novel.
in 1958, nathaniel branden established nathaniel branden lectures, later incorporated as the nathaniel branden institute (nbi), to promote rand's philosophy.
collective members gave lectures for nbi and wrote articles for objectivist periodicals that she edited.
rand later published some of these articles in book form.
however, some former nbi students believed the extent of these behaviors was exaggerated, and the problem was concentrated among rand's closest followers in new york.
rand was unimpressed with many of the nbi students and held them to strict standards, sometimes reacting coldly or angrily to those who disagreed with her.
she received an honorary doctorate of humane letters from lewis & clark college on 2 october 1963.
she also began delivering annual lectures at the ford hall forum, responding afterward to questions from the audience.
during these speeches and q&a sessions, she often took controversial stances on political and social issues of the day.
in 1964, nathaniel branden began an affair with the young actress patrecia scott, whom he later married.
nathaniel and barbara branden kept the affair hidden from rand.
rand published an article in "the objectivist" repudiating nathaniel branden for dishonesty and other "irrational behavior in his private life".
in subsequent years, rand and several more of her closest associates parted company.
rand underwent surgery for lung cancer in 1974 after decades of heavy smoking.
during the late 1970s her activities within the objectivist movement declined, especially after the death of her husband on november 9, 1979.
one of her final projects was work on a never-completed television adaptation of "atlas shrugged".
rand's funeral was attended by some of her prominent followers, including alan greenspan.
a floral arrangement in the shape of a dollar sign was placed near her casket.
in her will, rand named leonard peikoff to inherit her estate.
she considered objectivism a systematic philosophy and laid out positions on metaphysics, epistemology, ethics, political philosophy, and aesthetics.
in metaphysics, rand supported philosophical realism, and opposed anything she regarded as mysticism or supernaturalism, including all forms of religion.
in her "introduction to objectivist epistemology", rand presented a theory of concept formation and rejected the analytic–synthetic dichotomy.
in ethics, rand argued for rational and ethical egoism (rational self-interest), as the guiding moral principle.
she said the individual should "exist for his own sake, neither sacrificing himself to others nor sacrificing others to himself".
she opposed statism, which she understood to include theocracy, absolute monarchy, nazism, fascism, communism, democratic socialism, and dictatorship.
rand believed that natural rights should be protected by a constitutionally limited government.
although her political views are often classified as conservative or libertarian, she preferred the term "radical for capitalism".
she worked with conservatives on political projects, but disagreed with them over issues such as religion and ethics.
she denounced libertarianism, which she associated with anarchism.
she rejected anarchism as a naïve theory based in subjectivism that could only lead to collectivism in practice.
in aesthetics, rand defined art as a "selective re-creation of reality according to an artist's metaphysical value-judgments".
according to her, art allows philosophical concepts to be presented in a concrete form that can be easily grasped, thereby fulfilling a need of human consciousness.
she described her own approach to literature as "romantic realism".
i devised the rest of my philosophy myself."
if one recognizes the supremacy of reason and applies it consistently, all the rest follows."
during rand's lifetime, her work evoked both extreme praise and condemnation.
rand's novels were derided by some critics when they were first published as being long and melodramatic.
however, they became bestsellers largely through word of mouth.
the first reviews rand received were for "night of january 16th".
reviews of the production were largely positive, but rand considered even positive reviews to be embarrassing because of significant changes made to her script by the producer.
overall these reviews were more positive than the reviews she received for her later work.
her 1938 novella "anthem" received little attention from reviewers, both for its first publication in england and for subsequent re-issues.
rand's first bestseller, "the fountainhead", received far fewer reviews than "we the living", and reviewers' opinions were mixed.
lorine pruette's positive review in "the new york times" was one that rand greatly appreciated.
there were other positive reviews, but rand dismissed most of them as either not understanding her message or as being from unimportant publications.
other negative reviews called the characters unsympathetic and rand's style "offensively pedestrian".
rand's 1957 novel "atlas shrugged" was widely reviewed and many of the reviews were strongly negative.
in "national review", conservative author whittaker chambers called the book "sophomoric" and "remarkably silly".
rand's nonfiction received far fewer reviews than her novels had.
her subsequent books got progressively less attention from reviewers.
in 2007, book critic leslie clark described her fiction as "romance novels with a patina of pseudo-philosophy".
rand's "atlas shrugged" was the second most popular choice, after the bible.
although rand's influence has been greatest in the united states, there has been international interest in her work.
other artists who have cited rand as an important influence on their lives and thought include comic book artist steve ditko and musician neil peart of rush.
rand provided a positive view of business and subsequently many business executives and entrepreneurs have admired and promoted her work.
she, or a character based on her, figures prominently (in positive and negative lights) in literary and science fiction novels by prominent american authors.
two movies have been made about rand's life.
a 1997 documentary film, "", was nominated for the academy award for best documentary feature.
"the passion of ayn rand", a 1999 television adaptation of the book of the same name, won several awards.
rand's image also appears on a 1999 u.s. postage stamp illustrated by artist nick gaetano.
although she rejected the labels "conservative" and "libertarian", rand has had continuing influence on right-wing politics and libertarianism.
she faced intense opposition from william f. buckley jr. and other contributors for the "national review" magazine.
they published numerous criticisms in the 1950s and 1960s by whittaker chambers, garry wills, and m. stanton evans.
a 1987 article in "the new york times" referred to her as the reagan administration's "novelist laureate".
republican congressmen and conservative pundits have acknowledged her influence on their lives and have recommended her novels.
the financial crisis of 2007–2008 spurred renewed interest in her works, especially "atlas shrugged", which some saw as foreshadowing the crisis.
opinion articles compared real-world events with the plot of the novel.
during this time, signs mentioning rand and her fictional hero john galt appeared at tea party protests.
corey robin of "the nation" alleged similarities between the "moral syntax of randianism" and fascism.
during rand's lifetime, her work received little attention from academic scholars.
a few articles about rand's ideas appeared in academic journals before her death in 1982, many of them in "the personalist".
other philosophers, writing in the same publication, argued that nozick misstated rand's case.
academic consideration of rand as a literary figure during her life was even more limited.
since rand's death, interest in her work has gradually increased.
her ethical argument, he says, is viewed by most commentators as an unconvincing variant of aristotle's ethics.
for example, the book’s main character lopuhov says “i am not a man to make sacrifices.
and indeed there are no such things.
some scholars focus specifically on rand's work.
in 1987 allan gotthelf, george walsh and david kelley co-founded the ayn rand society, a group affiliated with the american philosophical association.
sciabarra co-edits the "journal of ayn rand studies", a nonpartisan peer-reviewed journal dedicated to the study of rand's philosophical and literary work.
in 2012, the university of pittsburgh press launched an "ayn rand society philosophical studies" series based on the proceedings of the society.
rand's ideas have also been made subjects of study at clemson and duke universities.
scholars of english and american literature have largely ignored her work, although attention to her literary work has increased since the 1990s.
in 1985, rand's intellectual heir, leonard peikoff, established the ayn rand institute, a nonprofit organization dedicated to promoting rand's ideas and works.
in 1990, after an ideological disagreement with peikoff, philosopher david kelley founded the institute for objectivist studies, now known as the atlas society.
in 2001, historian john mccaskey organized the anthem foundation for objectivist scholarship, which provides grants for scholarly work on objectivism in academia.
the charitable foundation of bb&t corporation has also given grants for teaching rand's ideas or works.
the university of texas at austin, the university of pittsburgh, and university of north carolina at chapel hill are among the schools that have received grants.
in some cases, these grants have been controversial due to their requiring research or teaching related to rand.
novels: other fiction: non-fiction:
he was an invited professor at the conservatoire national des arts et métiers (2000).
alain connes studies operator algebras.
in his early work on von neumann algebras in the 1970s, he succeeded in obtaining the almost complete classification of injective factors.
he also formulated the connes embedding problem.
following this, he made contributions in operator k-theory and index theory, which culminated in the baum–connes conjecture.
he also introduced cyclic cohomology in the early 1980s as a first step in the study of noncommutative differential geometry.
he was a member of bourbaki.
connes has applied his work in areas of mathematics and theoretical physics, including number theory, differential geometry and particle physics.
connes was awarded the fields medal in 1982, the crafoord prize in 2001 and the gold medal of the cnrs in 2004.
he was an invited speaker at the icm in 1974 at vancouver and in 1986 at berkeley and a plenary speaker at the icm in 1978 at helsinki.
his elder brother, leo garnet dwan (1883–1964), became a physician.
allan dwan studied engineering at the university of notre dame and then worked for a lighting company in chicago.
at that time, some of the east coast movie makers began to spend winters in california where the climate allowed them to continue productions requiring warm weather.
soon, a number of movie companies worked there year-round, and in 1911, dwan began working part-time in hollywood.
while still in new york, in 1917 he was the founding president of the east coast chapter of the motion picture directors association.
dwan operated flying a studios in la mesa, california from august 1911 to july 1912.
flying a was one of the first motion pictures studios in california history.
dwan directed gloria swanson in eight feature films, and one short film made in the short-lived sound-on-film process phonofilm.
he directed his last movie in 1961.
he died in los angeles at the age of 96, and is interred in the san fernando mission cemetery, mission hills, california.
dwan has a star on the hollywood walk of fame at 6263 hollywood boulevard.
algeria ( , ), officially the people's democratic republic of algeria, is a country in the maghreb region of north africa.
the capital and most populous city is algiers, located in the far north of the country on the mediterranean coast.
with an area of , algeria is the tenth-largest country in the world, and the largest by area in the african union and the arab world.
with an estimated population of over 44 million, it is the eighth-most populous country in africa.
the country has a semi-arid geography, with most of the population living in the fertile north and the sahara dominating the geography of the south.
this arid geography makes the country very vulnerable to climate change .
most of the population is arab-berber, practicing islam and using the official languages of arabic and berber.
however, french serves as an administrative and education language in some contexts, and algerian arabic is the main spoken language.
algeria has a semi-presidential republic, with local constituencies consisting of 58 provinces and 1,541 communes (counties).
algeria is a regional and middle power.
it has the highest human development index of all non-island african countries and one of the largest economies on the continent, based largely on energy exports.
algeria has the 16th largest oil reserves in the world and the second largest in africa, while it has the ninth largest reserves of natural gas.
sonatrach, the national oil company, is the largest company in africa, supplying large amounts of natural gas to europe.
algeria has one of the largest militaries in africa and the largest defence budget.
other forms of the name are: , ; .
it is officially the people's democratic republic of algeria (, , abbreviated as radp).
in the region of ain hanech (saïda province), early remnants (200,000 bc) of hominid occupation in north africa were found.
neanderthal tool makers produced hand axes in the levalloisian and mousterian styles (43,000 bc) similar to those in the levant.
algeria was the site of the highest state of development of middle paleolithic flake tool techniques.
tools of this era, starting about 30,000 bc, are called aterian (after the archaeological site of bir el ater, south of tebessa).
the earliest blade industries in north africa are called iberomaurusian (located mainly in the oran region).
this industry appears to have spread throughout the coastal regions of the maghreb between 15,000 and 10,000 bc.
this life, richly depicted in the tassili n'ajjer paintings, predominated in algeria until the classical period.
these settlements served as market towns as well as anchorages.
as carthaginian power grew, its impact on the indigenous population increased dramatically.
berber civilisation was already at a stage in which agriculture, manufacturing, trade, and political organisation supported several states.
by the early 4th century bc, berbers formed the single largest element of the carthaginian army.
in the revolt of the mercenaries, berber soldiers rebelled from 241 to 238 bc after being unpaid following the defeat of carthage in the first punic war.
the carthaginian state declined because of successive defeats by the romans in the punic wars.
in 146 bc the city of carthage was destroyed.
as carthaginian power waned, the influence of berber leaders in the hinterland grew.
by the 2nd century bc, several large but loosely administered berber kingdoms had emerged.
two of them were established in numidia, behind the coastal areas controlled by carthage.
west of numidia lay mauretania, which extended across the moulouya river in modern-day morocco to the atlantic ocean.
after masinissa's death in 148 bc, the berber kingdoms were divided and reunited several times.
masinissa's line survived until 24 ad, when the remaining berber territory was annexed to the roman empire.
for several centuries algeria was ruled by the romans, who founded many colonies in the region.
like the rest of north africa, algeria was one of the breadbaskets of the empire, exporting cereals and other agricultural products.
saint augustine was the bishop of hippo regius (modern-day annaba, algeria), located in the roman province of africa.
the germanic vandals of geiseric moved into north africa in 429, and by 435 controlled coastal numidia.
they did not make any significant settlement on the land, as they were harassed by local tribes.
after negligible resistance from the locals, muslim arabs of the umayyad caliphate conquered algeria in the early 8th century.
large numbers of the indigenous berber people converted to islam.
the christians left in three waves: after the initial conquest, in the 10th century and the 11th.
the last were evacuated to sicily by the normans and the few remaining died out in the 14th century.
it was during this time that the fatimids or children of fatima, daughter of muhammad, came to the maghreb.
the fatimid caliphate began to collapse when its governors the zirids seceded.
in order to punish them the fatimids sent the arab banu hilal and banu sulaym against them.
the resultant war is recounted in the epic tāghribāt.
the zirids, however, were ultimately defeated ushering in an adoption of arab customs and culture.
the amazighs historically consisted of several tribes.
the two main branches were the botr and barnès tribes, who were divided into tribes, and again into sub-tribes.
each region of the maghreb contained several tribes (for example, sanhadja, houara, zenata, masmouda, kutama, awarba, and berghwata).
all these tribes made independent territorial decisions.
several amazigh dynasties emerged during the middle ages in the maghreb and other nearby lands.
there reigned in ifriqiya, current tunisia, a berber family, zirid, somehow recognising the suzerainty of the fatimid caliph of cairo.
probably in 1048, the zirid ruler or viceroy, el-mu'izz, decided to end this suzerainty.
the fatimid state was too weak to attempt a punitive expedition; the viceroy, el-mu'izz, also found another means of revenge.
the then fatimid vizier devised to relinquish control of the maghreb and obtained the agreement of his sovereign.
this not only prompted the bedouins to leave, but the fatimid treasury even gave them a light expatriation cash allowance.
whole tribes set off with women, children, ancestors, animals and camping equipment.
from there they gradually gained the upper algiers and oran plains.
some were forcibly taken by the almohads in the second half of the 12th century.
ibn khaldun noted that the lands ravaged by banu hilal tribes had become completely arid desert.
in the early 16th century, spain constructed fortified outposts (presidios) on or near the algerian coast.
spain took control of few coastal towns like mers el kebir in 1505; oran in 1509; and tlemcen, mostaganem and ténès in 1510.
in the same year, a few merchants of algiers ceded one of the rocky islets in their harbour to spain, which built a fort on it.
the presidios in north africa turned out to be a costly and largely ineffective military endeavour that did not guarantee access for spain's merchant fleet.
the region of algeria was partially ruled by ottomans for three centuries from 1516 to 1830.
in 1516 the turkish privateer brothers aruj and hayreddin barbarossa, who operated successfully under the hafsids, moved their base of operations to algiers.
when aruj was killed in 1518 during his invasion of tlemcen, hayreddin succeeded him as military commander of algiers.
the ottoman sultan gave him the title of beylerbey and a contingent of some 2,000 janissaries.
the next beylerbey was hayreddin's son hasan, who assumed the position in 1544.
until 1587 the area was governed by officers who served terms with no fixed limits.
subsequently, with the institution of a regular ottoman administration, governors with the title of pasha ruled for three-year terms.
the pasha was assisted by janissaries, known in algeria as the ojaq and led by an agha.
discontent among the ojaq rose in the mid-1600s because they were not paid regularly, and they repeatedly revolted against the pasha.
as a result, the agha charged the pasha with corruption and incompetence and seized power in 1659.
plague had repeatedly struck the cities of north africa.
algiers lost from 30,000 to 50,000 inhabitants to the plague in 1620–21, and suffered high fatalities in 1654–57, 1665, 1691 and 1740–42.
in 1671, the taifa rebelled, killed the agha, and placed one of its own in power.
the new leader received the title of dey.
after 1689, the right to select the dey passed to the divan, a council of some sixty nobles.
it was at first dominated by the "ojaq"; but by the 18th century, it had become the dey's instrument.
the dey was in effect a constitutional autocrat.
despite usurpation, military coups and occasional mob rule, the day-to-day operation of ottoman government was remarkably orderly.
although the regency patronised the tribal chieftains, it never had the unanimous allegiance of the countryside, where heavy taxation frequently provoked unrest.
autonomous tribal states were tolerated, and the regency's authority was seldom applied in the kabylie.
the barbary pirates preyed on christian and other non-islamic shipping in the western mediterranean sea.
the pirates often took the passengers and crew on the ships and sold them or used them as slaves.
they also did a brisk business in ransoming some of the captives.
according to robert davis, from the 16th to 19th century, pirates captured 1 million to 1.25 million europeans as slaves.
in 1551, the ottoman governor of algiers, turgut reis, enslaved the entire population of the maltese island of gozo.
barbary pirates often attacked the balearic islands.
the threat was so severe that residents abandoned the island of formentera.
the introduction of broad-sail ships from the beginning of the 17th century allowed them to branch out into the atlantic.
in july 1627 two pirate ships from algiers under the command of dutch pirate jan janszoon sailed as far as iceland, raiding and capturing slaves.
two weeks earlier another pirate ship from salé in morocco had also raided in iceland.
some of the slaves brought to algiers were later ransomed back to iceland, but some chose to stay in algeria.
in 1629 pirate ships from algeria raided the faroe islands.
barbary raids in the mediterranean continued to attack spanish merchant shipping, and as a result, the spanish navy bombarded algiers in 1783 and 1784.
over 20,000 cannonballs were fired, much of the city and its fortifications were destroyed and most of the algerian fleet was sunk.
in the 19th century, the pirates forged affiliations with caribbean powers, paying a "licence tax" in exchange for safe harbour of their vessels.
piracy on american vessels in the mediterranean resulted in the united states initiating the first (1801–1805) and second barbary wars (1815).
following those wars, algeria was weaker and europeans, with an anglo-dutch fleet commanded by the british lord exmouth, attacked algiers.
in addition, the dey agreed to end the practice of enslaving christians.
despite being removed from algeria in the 19th century, spain retained a presence in morocco.
algeria consistently opposed spanish fortresses and control in nearby morocco through the 20th century.
under the pretext of a slight to their consul, the french invaded and captured algiers in 1830.
historian ben kiernan wrote on the french conquest of algeria: "by 1875, the french conquest was complete.
the war had killed approximately 825,000 indigenous algerians since 1830."
french losses from 1831–51 were 92,329 dead in the hospital and only 3,336 killed in action.
the population of algeria, which stood at about 2.9 million in 1872, reached nearly 11 million in 1960.
french policy was predicated on "civilizing" the country.
the slave trade and piracy in algeria ceased following the french conquest.
the conquest of algeria by the french took some time and resulted in considerable bloodshed.
a combination of violence and disease epidemics caused the indigenous algerian population to decline by nearly one-third from 1830 to 1872.
during this period, a small but influential french-speaking indigenous elite was formed, made up of berbers, mostly kabyles.
as a consequence, french government favored the kabyles.
about 80% of indigenous schools were constructed for kabyles.
from 1848 until independence, france administered the whole mediterranean region of algeria as an integral part and "département" of the nation.
between 1825 and 1847, 50,000 french people emigrated to algeria.
many europeans settled in oran and algiers, and by the early 20th century they formed a majority of the population in both cities.
during the late 19th and early 20th century; the european share was almost a fifth of the population.
the french government aimed at making algeria an assimilated part of france, and this included substantial educational investments especially after 1900.
in may 1945, the uprising against the occupying french forces was suppressed through what is now known as the sétif and guelma massacre.
tensions between the two population groups came to a head in 1954, when the first violent events of what was later called the algerian war began.
the fln used hit and run attacks in algeria and france as part of its war, and the french conducted severe reprisals.
the war led to the death of hundreds of thousands of algerians and hundreds of thousands of injuries.
horne estimated algerian casualties during the span of eight years to be around 700,000.
the war uprooted more than 2 million algerians.
the war against french rule concluded in 1962, when algeria gained complete independence following the march 1962 evian agreements and the july 1962 self-determination referendum.
some estimates put the algerian death toll during the french colonial rule at over 10 million.
the number of european "pied-noirs" who fled algeria totaled more than 900,000 between 1962 and 1964.
algeria's first president was the front de libération nationale (fln) leader ahmed ben bella.
morocco's claim to portions of western algeria led to the sand war in 1963.
ben bella was overthrown in 1965 by houari boumédiène, his former ally and defence minister.
under ben bella, the government had become increasingly socialist and authoritarian; boumédienne continued this trend.
but, he relied much more on the army for his support, and reduced the sole legal party to a symbolic role.
he collectivised agriculture and launched a massive industrialisation drive.
oil extraction facilities were nationalised.
this was especially beneficial to the leadership after the international 1973 oil crisis.
in the 1960s and 1970s under president houari boumediene, algeria pursued a program of industrialisation within a state-controlled socialist economy.
boumediene's successor, chadli bendjedid, introduced some liberal economic reforms.
he promoted a policy of arabisation in algerian society and public life.
teachers of arabic, brought in from other muslim countries, spread conventional islamic thought in schools and sowed the seeds of a return to orthodox islam.
the algerian economy became increasingly dependent on oil, leading to hardship when the price collapsed during the 1980s oil glut.
political parties developed, such as the islamic salvation front (fis), a broad coalition of muslim groups.
in december 1991 the islamic salvation front dominated the first of two rounds of legislative elections.
fearing the election of an islamist government, the authorities intervened on 11 january 1992, cancelling the elections.
bendjedid resigned and a high council of state was installed to act as the presidency.
the islamist militants conducted a violent campaign of civilian massacres.
the armed islamic group declared a ceasefire in october 1997.
algeria held elections in 1999, considered biased by international observers and most opposition groups which were won by president abdelaziz bouteflika.
the ais disbanded and levels of insurgent violence fell rapidly.
bouteflika was re-elected in the april 2004 presidential election after campaigning on a programme of national reconciliation.
the programme comprised economic, institutional, political and social reform to modernise the country, raise living standards, and tackle the causes of alienation.
it also included a second amnesty initiative, the charter for peace and national reconciliation, which was approved in a referendum in september 2005.
it offered amnesty to most guerrillas and government security forces.
in november 2008, the algerian constitution was amended following a vote in parliament, removing the two-term limit on presidential incumbents.
this change enabled bouteflika to stand for re-election in the 2009 presidential elections, and he was re-elected in april 2009.
a continuing series of protests throughout the country started on 28 december 2010, inspired by similar protests across the middle east and north africa.
on 24 february 2011, the government lifted algeria's 19-year-old state of emergency.
the government enacted legislation dealing with political parties, the electoral code, and the representation of women in elected bodies.
in april 2011, bouteflika promised further constitutional and political reform.
however, elections are routinely criticized by opposition groups as unfair and international human rights groups say that media censorship and harassment of political opponents continue.
on 2 april 2019, bouteflika resigned from the presidency after mass protests against his candidacy for a fifth term in office.
since the 2011 breakup of sudan, algeria has been the largest country in africa, and the mediterranean basin.
its southern part includes a significant portion of the sahara.
both atlas tend to merge in eastern algeria.
the vast mountain ranges of aures and nememcha occupy the entire northeastern algeria and are delineated by the tunisian border.
the highest point is mount tahat ().
algeria lies mostly between latitudes 19° and 37°n (a small area is north of 37°n and south of 19°n), and longitudes 9°w and 12°e.
most of the coastal area is hilly, sometimes even mountainous, and there are a few natural harbours.
the area from the coast to the tell atlas is fertile.
south of the tell atlas is a steppe landscape ending with the saharan atlas; farther south, there is the sahara desert.
the hoggar mountains (), also known as the hoggar, are a highland region in central sahara, southern algeria.
they are located about south of the capital, algiers, and just east of tamanghasset.
algiers, oran, constantine, and annaba are algeria's main cities.
in this region, midday desert temperatures can be hot year round.
after sunset, however, the clear, dry air permits rapid loss of heat, and the nights are cool to chilly.
enormous daily ranges in temperature are recorded.
rainfall is fairly plentiful along the coastal part of the tell atlas, ranging from annually, the amount of precipitation increasing from west to east.
precipitation is heaviest in the northern part of eastern algeria, where it reaches as much as in some years.
farther inland, the rainfall is less plentiful.
algeria also has ergs, or sand dunes, between mountains.
among these, in the summer time when winds are heavy and gusty, temperatures can go up to .
the varied vegetation of algeria includes coastal, mountainous and grassy desert-like regions which all support a wide range of wildlife.
many of the creatures comprising the algerian wildlife live in close proximity to civilisation.
algeria also has a small african leopard and saharan cheetah population, but these are seldom seen.
a species of deer, the barbary stag, inhabits the dense humid forests in the north-eastern areas.
a variety of bird species makes the country an attraction for bird watchers.
the forests are inhabited by boars and jackals.
barbary macaques are the sole native monkey.
snakes, monitor lizards, and numerous other reptiles can be found living among an array of rodents throughout the semi arid regions of algeria.
many animals are now extinct, including the barbary lions, atlas bears and crocodiles.
in the north, some of the native flora includes macchia scrub, olive trees, oaks, cedars and other conifers.
the mountain regions contain large forests of evergreens (aleppo pine, juniper, and evergreen oak) and some deciduous trees.
fig, eucalyptus, agave, and various palm trees grow in the warmer areas.
the grape vine is indigenous to the coast.
in the sahara region, some oases have palm trees.
acacias with wild olives are the predominant flora in the remainder of the sahara.
camels are used extensively; the desert also abounds with venomous and nonvenomous snakes, scorpions, and numerous insects.
elected politicians have relatively little sway over algeria.
the most powerful man might have been mohamed mediène, the head of military intelligence, before he's brought down during the 2019 protests.
in recent years, many of these generals have died, retired, or imprisoned.
the head of state is the president of algeria, who is elected for a five-year term.
the president was formerly limited to two five-year terms, but a constitutional amendment passed by the parliament on 11 november 2008 removed this limitation.
algeria has universal suffrage at 18 years of age.
the president is the head of the army, the council of ministers and the high security council.
he appoints the prime minister who is also the head of government.
in addition, political campaigns must be exempt from the aforementioned subjects.
parliamentary elections were last held in may 2012, and were judged to be largely free by international monitors, though local groups alleged fraud and irregularities.
in the elections, the fln won 221 seats, the military-backed national rally for democracy won 70, and the islamist green algeria alliance won 47.
algeria is included in the european union's european neighbourhood policy (enp) which aims at bringing the eu and its neighbours closer.
it has a budget of €15.4 billion and provides the bulk of funding through a number of programmes.
in 2009, the french government agreed to compensate victims of nuclear tests in algeria.
algerian officials and activists believe that this is a good first step and hope that this move would encourage broader reparation.
total military personnel include 147,000 active, 150,000 reserve, and 187,000 paramilitary staff (2008 estimate).
service in the military is compulsory for men aged 19–30, for a total of 12 months.
the military expenditure was 4.3% of the gross domestic product (gdp) in 2012.
algeria has the second largest military in north africa with the largest defence budget in africa ($10 billion).
most of algeria's weapons are imported from russia, with whom they are a close ally.
in 2007, the algerian air force signed a deal with russia to purchase 49 mig-29smt and 6 mig-29ubt at an estimated cost of $1.9 billion.
russia is also building two 636-type diesel submarines for algeria.
in december 2016, the "euro-mediterranean human rights monitor" issued a report regarding violation of media freedom in algeria.
due to the fact that the journalists and activists criticize the ruling government, some media organizations' licenses are cancelled.
independent and autonomous trade unions face routine harassment from the government, with many leaders imprisoned and protests suppressed.
in 2016 a number of unions, many of which were involved in the 2010–2012 algerian protests, have been deregistered by the government.
homosexuality is illegal in algeria.
public homosexual behavior is punishable by up to two years in prison.
algeria is divided into 58 provinces ("wilayas"), 553 districts ("daïras") and 1,541 municipalities ("baladiyahs").
each province, district, and municipality is named after its seat, which is usually the largest city.
the administrative divisions have changed several times since independence.
when introducing new provinces, the numbers of old provinces are kept, hence the non-alphabetical order.
with their official numbers, currently (since 1983) they are algeria is classified as an upper middle income country by the world bank.
algeria's currency is the dinar (dzd).
the economy remains dominated by the state, a legacy of the country's socialist post-independence development model.
in recent years, the algerian government has halted the privatization of state-owned industries and imposed restrictions on imports and foreign involvement in its economy.
these restrictions are just starting to be lifted off recently although questions about algeria's slowly-diversifying economy remain.
algeria has struggled to develop industries outside hydrocarbons in part because of high costs and an inert state bureaucracy.
public spending has increased by 27% annually during the past 5 years.
the 2010–14 public-investment programme will cost us$286 billion, 40% of which will go to human development.
if hydrocarbons are excluded, growth has been estimated at 4.8%.
growth of 3% is expected in 2012, rising to 4.2% in 2013.
the rate of inflation was 4% and the budget deficit 3% of gdp.
the current-account surplus is estimated at 9.3% of gdp and at the end of december 2011, official reserves were put at us$182 billion.
inflation, the lowest in the region, has remained stable at 4% on average between 2003 and 2007.
in 2011 algeria announced a budgetary surplus of $26.9 billion, 62% increase in comparison to 2010 surplus.
in general, the country exported $73 billion worth of commodities while it imported $46 billion.
thanks to strong hydrocarbon revenues, algeria has a cushion of $173 billion in foreign currency reserves and a large hydrocarbon stabilization fund.
in addition, algeria's external debt is extremely low at about 2% of gdp.
in 2011, the agricultural sector and services recorded growth of 10% and 5.3%, respectively.
about 14% of the labor force are employed in the agricultural sector.
fiscal policy in 2011 remained expansionist and made it possible to maintain the pace of public investment and to contain the strong demand for jobs and housing.
algeria has not joined the wto, despite several years of negotiations.
dubai-based conglomerate emarat dzayer group said it had signed a joint venture agreement to develop a $1.6 billion steel factory in algeria.
algeria, whose economy is reliant on petroleum, has been an opec member since 1969.
its crude oil production stands at around 1.1 million barrels/day, but it is also a major gas producer and exporter, with important links to europe.
algeria has the 10th-largest reserves of natural gas in the world and is the sixth-largest gas exporter.
the u.s. energy information administration reported that in 2005, algeria had of proven natural-gas reserves.
it also ranks 16th in oil reserves.
non-hydrocarbon growth for 2011 was projected at 5%.
to cope with social demands, the authorities raised expenditure, especially on basic food support, employment creation, support for smes, and higher salaries.
high hydrocarbon prices have improved the current account and the already large international reserves position.
income from oil and gas rose in 2011 as a result of continuing high oil prices, though the trend in production volume is downwards.
the algerian national oil company is sonatrach, which plays a key role in all aspects of the oil and natural gas sectors in algeria.
all foreign operators must work in partnership with sonatrach, which usually has majority ownership in production-sharing agreements.
access to biocapacity in algeria is lower than world average.
in 2016, algeria had 0.53 global hectares of biocapacity per person within its territory, much less than the world average of 1.6 global hectares per person.
in 2016 algeria used 2.4 global hectares of biocapacity per person - their ecological footprint of consumption.
this means they use just under 4.5 times as much biocapacity as algeria contains.
as a result, algeria is running a biocapacity deficit.
algeria has invested an estimated 100 billion dinars towards developing research facilities and paying researchers.
this development program is meant to advance alternative energy production, especially solar and wind power.
currently, algeria has 20,000 research professors at various universities and over 780 research labs, with state-set goals to expand to 1,000.
besides solar energy, areas of research in algeria include space and satellite telecommunications, nuclear power and medical research.
despite a decline in total unemployment, youth and women unemployment is high.
unemployment particularly affects the young, with a jobless rate of 21.5% among the 15–24 age group.
the only natural world heritage site is the tassili n'ajjer, a mountain range.
this network will be complemented by the east-west highway, a major infrastructure project currently under construction.
it is a 3-way, highway, linking annaba in the extreme east to the tlemcen in the far west.
algeria is also crossed by the trans-sahara highway, which is now completely paved.
in january 2016 algeria's population was an estimated 40.4 million, who are mainly arab-berber ethnically.
at the outset of the 20th century, its population was approximately four million.
28.1% of algerians are under the age of 15.
women make up 70% of the country's lawyers and 60% of its judges and also dominate the field of medicine.
increasingly, women are contributing more to household income than men.
60% of university students are women, according to university researchers.
between 90,000 and 165,000 sahrawis from western sahara live in the sahrawi refugee camps, in the western algerian sahara desert.
in 2009, 35,000 chinese migrant workers lived in algeria.
the largest concentration of algerian migrants outside algeria is in france, which has reportedly over 1.7 million algerians of up to the second generation.
descendants of andalusian refugees are also present in the population of algiers and other cities.
berbers and berber-speaking algerians are divided into many groups with varying languages.
during the colonial period, there was a large (10% in 1960) european population who became known as "pied-noirs".
they were primarily of french, spanish and italian origin.
almost all of this population left during the war of independence or immediately after its end.
modern standard arabic and berber are the official languages.
algerian arabic (darja) is the language used by the majority of the population.
colloquial algerian arabic is heavily infused with borrowings from french and berber.
berber has been recognised as a "national language" by the constitutional amendment of 8 may 2002.
kabyle, the predominant berber language, is taught and is partially co-official (with a few restrictions) in parts of kabylie.
in february 2016, the algerian constitution passed a resolution that would make berber an official language alongside arabic.
it can be regarded as a lingua franca of algeria.
in 2008, 11.2 million algerians could read and write in french.
an abassa institute study in april 2000 found that 60% of households could speak and understand french or 18 million in a population of 30 million then.
algeria emerged as a bilingual state after 1962.
colloquial algerian arabic is spoken by about 72% of the population and berber by 27–30%.
there are about 150,000 ibadis in the m'zab valley in the region of ghardaia.
estimates of the christian population range from 60,000 to 200,000.
algerian citizens who are christians predominantly belong to protestant groups, which have seen increased pressure from the government in recent years including many forced closures.
famous novelists of the 20th century include mohammed dib, albert camus, kateb yacine and ahlam mosteghanemi while assia djebar is widely translated.
the works of the sanusi family in pre-colonial times, and of emir abdelkader and sheikh ben badis in colonial times, are widely noted.
the latin author apuleius was born in madaurus (mdaourouch), in what later became algeria.
contemporary algerian cinema is various in terms of genre, exploring a wider range of themes and issues.
there has been a transition from cinema which focused on the war of independence to films more concerned with the everyday lives of algerians.
mohammed khadda and m'hamed issiakhem have been notable in recent years.
this period had also known augustine of hippo, nonius marcellus and martianus capella, among many others.
albert camus was an algerian-born french pied-noir author.
in 1957 he was awarded the nobel prize in literature.
chaâbi music is a typically algerian musical genre characterized by specific rhythms and of qacidate (popular poems) in arabic dialect.
the undisputed master of this music is el hadj m'hamed el anka.
the constantinois malouf style is saved by musician from whom mohamed tahar fergani is a performer.
rahaba music style is unique to the aures.
souad massi is a rising algerian folk singer.
other algerian singers of the diaspora include manel filali in germany and kenza farah in france.
tergui music is sung in tuareg languages generally, tinariwen had a worldwide success.
finally, the staïfi music is born in sétif and remains a unique style of its kind.
modern music is available in several facets, raï music is a style typical of western algeria.
rap, a relatively recent style in algeria, is experiencing significant growth.
between 2007 and 2013, fdatic subsidised 98 films (feature films, documentaries and short films).
in mid-2013, aarc had already supported a total of 78 films, including 42 feature films, 6 short films and 30 documentaries.
various games have existed in algeria since antiquity.
in the aures, people played several games such as el kherba or el khergueba (chess variant).
playing cards, checkers and chess games are part of algerian culture.
racing (fantasia) and rifle shooting are part of cultural recreation of the algerians.
the first algerian and african gold medalist is boughera el ouafi in 1928 olympics of amsterdam in the marathon.
the second algerian medalist was alain mimoun in 1956 summer olympics in melbourne.
football is the most popular sport in algeria.
the algeria national football team qualified for the 1982 fifa world cup, 1986 fifa world cup, 2010 fifa world cup and 2014 fifa world cup.
in addition, several football clubs have won continental and international trophies as the club es sétif or js kabylia.
the algerian football federation is an association of algeria football clubs organizing national competitions and international matches of the selection of algeria national football team.
algerian cuisine is rich and diverse.
the country was considered as the "granary of rome".
it offers a component of dishes and varied dishes, depending on the region and according to the seasons.
the cuisine uses cereals as the main products, since they are always produced with abundance in the country.
there is not a dish where cereals are not present.
algerian cuisine varies from one region to another, according to seasonal vegetables.
it can be prepared using meat, fish and vegetables.
merguez sausage is widely used in algeria, but it differs, depending on the region and on the added spices.
cakes are marketed and can be found in cities either in algeria, in europe or north america.
however, traditional cakes are also made at home, following the habits and customs of each family.
algerian pastry also contains tunisian or french cakes.
marketed and home-made bread products include varieties such as kessra or khmira or harchaya, chopsticks and so-called washers khoubz dar or matloue.
other traditional meals sold often as street food include mhadjeb or mahjouba, karantika, doubara, chakhchoukha, hassouna, and t'chicha.
access to "improved water sources" was limited to 92% of the population in urban areas and 80% of the population in the rural areas.
some 99% of algerians living in urban areas, but only 82% of those living in rural areas, had access to "improved sanitation".
given algeria's young population, policy favors preventive health care and clinics over hospitals.
in keeping with this policy, the government maintains an immunization program.
however, poor sanitation and unclean water still cause tuberculosis, hepatitis, measles, typhoid fever, cholera and dysentery.
the poor generally receive health care free of charge.
health records have been maintained in algeria since 1882 and began adding muslims living in the south to their vital record database in 1905 during french rule.
since 1972, arabic is used as the language of instruction during the first nine years of schooling.
from the third year, french is taught and it is also the language of instruction for science classes.
the students can also learn english, italian, spanish and german.
apart from the 122 private schools, the universities of the state are free of charge.
after nine years of primary school, students can go to the high school or to an educational institution.
the school offers two programs: general or technical.
education is officially compulsory for children between the ages of six and 15.
in 2008, the illiteracy rate for people over 10 was 22.3%, 15.6% for men and 29.0% for women.
the province with the lowest rate of illiteracy was algiers province at 11.6%, while the province with the highest rate was djelfa province at 35.5%.
algeria has 26 universities and 67 institutions of higher education, which must accommodate a million algerians and 80,000 foreign students in 2008.
the university of algiers, founded in 1879, is the oldest, it offers education in various disciplines (law, medicine, science and letters).
25 of these universities and almost all of the institutions of higher education were founded after the independence of the country.
among the most important universities, there are the university of sciences and technology houari boumediene, the university of mentouri constantine, and university of oran es-senia.
the university of abou bekr belkaïd in tlemcen and university of batna hadj lakhdar occupy the 26th and 45th row in africa.
this is a list of characters in ayn rand's 1957 novel "atlas shrugged."
the following are major characters from the novel.
dagny taggart is the protagonist of the novel.
she is vice-president in charge of operations for taggart transcontinental, under her brother, james taggart.
given james' incompetence, dagny is responsible for all the workings of the railroad.
francisco d'anconia is one of the central characters in "atlas shrugged", an owner by inheritance of the world's largest copper mining operation.
he is a childhood friend, and the first love, of dagny taggart.
a child prodigy of exceptional talents, francisco was dubbed the "climax" of the d'anconia line, an already prestigious family of skilled industrialists.
he was a classmate of john galt and ragnar danneskjöld and student of both hugh akston and robert stadler.
he began working while still in school, proving that he could have made a fortune without the aid of his family's wealth and power.
later, francisco bankrupts the d'anconia business to put it out of others' reach.
his full name is given as "francisco domingo carlos andres sebastián d'anconia".
john galt is the primary male hero of "atlas shrugged".
only eddie's side of their conversations is given in the novel.
later in the novel, the reader discovers this worker's true identity.
this prototype was found by dagny taggart and hank rearden.
much of the book's third division is given to his broadcast speech, which presents the author's philosophy of objectivism.
henry (known as "hank") rearden is one of the central characters in "atlas shrugged".
he owns the most important steel company in the united states, and invents rearden metal, an alloy stronger, lighter, cheaper and tougher than steel.
he lives in philadelphia with his wife lillian, his brother philip, and his elderly mother.
edwin "eddie" willers is the special assistant to the vice-president in charge of operations at taggart transcontinental.
his father and grandfather worked for the taggarts, and himself likewise.
he is completely loyal to dagny and to taggart transcontinental.
after dagny shifts her attention and loyalty to saving the captive galt, willers maintains the railroad until its collapse.
he works to ensure that once those espousing galt's philosophy are restored to their rightful place in society, they have enough capital to rebuild the world.
considered a misfit by galt's other adherents, he views his actions as a means to speed the world along in understanding galt's perspective.
the president of taggart transcontinental and the book's most important antagonist.
taggart is an expert influence peddler but incapable of making operational decisions on his own.
in a sense, he is the antithesis of dagny.
in the final chapters of the novel, he suffers a complete mental breakdown upon realizing that he can no longer deceive himself in this respect.
the unsupportive wife of hank rearden, who dislikes his habits and (secretly at first) seeks to ruin rearden to prove her own value.
lillian achieves this, when she passes information to james taggart about her husband's affair with his sister.
this information is used to persuade rearden to sign a gift certificate which delivers all the property rights of rearden metal to others.
lillian thereafter uses james taggart for sexual satisfaction, until hank abandons her.
ferris is a biologist who works as "co-ordinator" at the state science institute.
he uses his position there to deride reason and productive achievement, and publishes a book entitled "why do you think you think?"
he clashes on several occasions with hank rearden, and twice attempts to blackmail rearden into giving up rearden metal.
he is also one of the group of looters who tries to get rearden to agree to the steel unification plan.
ferris hosts the demonstration of the project x weapon, and is the creator of the ferris persuader, a torture machine.
when john galt is captured by the looters, ferris uses the device on galt, but it breaks down before extracting the information ferris wants from galt.
ferris represents the group which uses brute force on the heroes to achieve the ends of the looters.
a former professor at patrick henry university, and along with colleague hugh akston, mentor to francisco d'anconia, john galt and ragnar danneskjöld.
he has since become a sell-out, one who had great promise but squandered it for social approval, to the detriment of the free.
the incompetent and treacherous lobbyist whom hank rearden reluctantly employs in washington, who rises to prominence and authority throughout the novel through trading favours and disloyalty.
later in the novel he becomes its top co-ordinator, a position that eventually becomes economic dictator of the country.
the following secondary characters also appear in the novel.
social anthropology studies patterns of behaviour and cultural anthropology studies cultural meaning, including norms and values.
linguistic anthropology studies how language influences social life.
biological or physical anthropology studies the biological development of humans.
oxford bibliographies describes visual anthropology as "the anthropological study of the visual and the visual study of the anthropological".
the abstract noun "anthropology" is first attested in reference to history.
its present use first appeared in renaissance germany in the works of magnus hundt and otto casmann.
(its adjectival form appeared in the works of aristotle.)
it began to be used in english, possibly via french ', by the early 18th century.
various short-lived organizations of anthropologists had already been formed.
the société ethnologique de paris, the first to use ethnology, was formed in 1839.
its members were primarily anti-slavery activists.
when slavery was abolished in france in 1848 the société was abandoned.
these anthropologists of the times were liberal, anti-slavery, and pro-human-rights activists.
they maintained international connections.
anthropology and many other current fields are the intellectual results of the comparative methods developed in the earlier 19th century.
for them, the publication of charles darwin's "on the origin of species" was the epiphany of everything they had begun to suspect.
darwin himself arrived at his conclusions through comparison of species he had seen in agronomy and in the wild.
darwin and wallace unveiled evolution in the late 1850s.
there was an immediate rush to bring it into the social sciences.
when he read darwin, he became an immediate convert to "transformisme", as the french called evolutionism.
broca, being what today would be called a neurosurgeon, had taken an interest in the pathology of speech.
he wanted to localize the difference between man and the other animals, which appeared to reside in speech.
he discovered the speech center of the human brain, today called broca's area after him.
the title was soon translated as "the anthropology of primitive peoples".
the last two volumes were published posthumously.
waitz defined anthropology as "the science of the nature of man".
he stresses that the data of comparison must be empirical, gathered by experimentation.
the history of civilization, as well as ethnology, are to be brought into the comparison.
waitz was influential among the british ethnologists.
it was the 2nd society dedicated to general anthropology in existence.
representatives from the french "société" were present, though not broca.
among the first associates were the young edward burnett tylor, inventor of cultural anthropology, and his brother alfred tylor, a geologist.
previously edward had referred to himself as an ethnologist; subsequently, an anthropologist.
the majority of these were evolutionist.
not religious himself, he insisted that darwin's conclusions lacked empirical foundation.
the major theorists belonged to these organizations.
they supported the gradual osmosis of anthropology curricula into the major institutions of higher learning.
by 1898, 48 educational institutions in 13 countries had some curriculum in anthropology.
none of the 75 faculty members were under a department named anthropology.
this meager statistic expanded in the 20th century to comprise anthropology departments in the majority of the world's higher educational institutions, many thousands in number.
anthropology has diversified from a few major subdivisions to dozens more.
the organization has reached global level.
cultural anthropology, in particular, has emphasized cultural relativism, holism, and the use of findings to frame cultural critiques.
ethnography is one of its primary research designs as well as the text that is generated from anthropological fieldwork.
in great britain and the commonwealth countries, the british tradition of social anthropology tends to dominate.
these fields frequently overlap but tend to use different methodologies and techniques.
european countries with overseas colonies tended to practice more ethnology (a term coined and defined by adam f. kollár in 1783).
it is sometimes referred to as sociocultural anthropology in the parts of the world that were influenced by the european tradition.
anthropology is a global discipline involving humanities, social sciences and natural sciences.
early anthropology originated in classical greece and persia and studied and tried to understand observable cultural diversity, such as by al-biruni of the islamic golden age.
according to clifford geertz, sociocultural anthropology has been heavily influenced by structuralist and postmodern theories, as well as a shift toward the analysis of modern societies.
during the 1970s and 1990s, there was an epistemological shift away from the positivist traditions that had largely informed the discipline.
during this shift, enduring questions about the nature and production of knowledge came to occupy a central place in cultural and social anthropology.
in contrast, archaeology and biological anthropology remained largely positivist.
due to this difference in epistemology, the four sub-fields of anthropology have lacked cohesion over the last several decades.
sociocultural anthropology draws together the principle axes of cultural anthropology and social anthropology.
there is no hard-and-fast distinction between them, and these categories overlap to a considerable degree.
inquiry in sociocultural anthropology is guided in part by cultural relativism, the attempt to understand other societies in terms of their own cultural symbols and values.
accepting other cultures in their own terms moderates reductionism in cross-cultural comparison.
this project is often accommodated in the field of ethnography.
ethnography can refer to both a methodology and the product of ethnographic research, i.e.
an ethnographic monograph.
as a methodology, ethnography is based upon long-term fieldwork within a community or other research site.
participant observation is one of the foundational methods of social and cultural anthropology.
ethnology involves the systematic comparison of different cultures.
the process of participant-observation can be especially helpful to understanding a culture from an emic (conceptual, vs. etic, or technical) point of view.
the study of kinship and social organization is a central focus of sociocultural anthropology, as kinship is a human universal.
comparison across cultures is a key element of method in sociocultural anthropology, including the industrialized (and de-industrialized) west.
the standard cross-cultural sample (sccs) includes 186 such cultures.
archaeology is the study of the human past through its material remains.
artifacts, faunal remains, and human altered landscapes are evidence of the cultural and material lives of past societies.
archaeologists examine material remains in order to deduce patterns of past human behavior and cultural practices.
linguistic anthropologists often draw on related fields including sociolinguistics, pragmatics, cognitive linguistics, semiotics, discourse analysis, and narrative analysis.
one of the central problems in the anthropology of art concerns the universality of 'art' as a cultural phenomenon.
ethnomusicology can be used in a wide variety of fields, such as teaching, politics, cultural anthropology etc.
later, the influence of study in this area spawned the creation of the periodical "ethnomusicology" and the society of ethnomusicology.
visual anthropology is concerned, in part, with the study and production of ethnographic photography, film and, since the mid-1990s, new media.
economic anthropology attempts to explain human economic behavior in its widest historic, geographic and cultural scope.
it has a complex relationship with the discipline of economics, of which it is highly critical.
economic anthropology remains, for the most part, focused upon exchange.
the school of thought derived from marx and known as political economy focuses on production, in contrast.
political economy introduced questions of history and colonialism to ahistorical anthropological theories of social structure and culture.
three main areas of interest rapidly developed.
the first of these areas was concerned with the "pre-capitalist" societies that were subject to evolutionary "tribal" stereotypes.
sahlin's work on hunter-gatherers as the "original affluent society" did much to dissipate that image.
the third area was on colonialism, imperialism, and the creation of the capitalist world-system.
more recently, these political economists have more directly addressed issues of industrial (and post-industrial) capitalism around the world.
applied anthropology refers to the application of the method and theory of anthropology to the analysis and solution of practical problems.
more simply, applied anthropology is the practical side of anthropological research; it includes researcher involvement and activism within the participating community.
it is closely related to development anthropology (distinct from the more critical anthropology of development).
anthropology of development tends to view development from a "critical" perspective.
the kind of issues addressed and implications for the approach simply involve pondering why, if a key development goal is to alleviate poverty, is poverty increasing?
why is there such a gap between plans and outcomes?
why are those working in development so willing to disregard history and the lessons it might offer?
why is development so externally driven rather than having an internal basis?
in short, why does so much planned development fail?
broadly, kinship patterns may be considered to include people related both by descent (one's social relations during development), and also relatives by marriage.
within kinship you have two different families.
people have their biological families and it is the people they share dna with.
this is called consanguineal relations or "blood ties".
people can also have a chosen family finding connection through "chosen family" in which they chose who they want to be a part of their family.
in some cases people are closer with their chosen family more than with their biological families.
anthropology engages often with feminists from non-western traditions, whose perspectives and experiences can differ from those of white european and american feminists.
historically, such 'peripheral' perspectives have sometimes been marginalized and regarded as less valid or important than knowledge from the western world.
feminist anthropologists have claimed that their research helps to correct this systematic bias in mainstream feminist theory.
feminist anthropologists are centrally concerned with the construction of gender across societies.
feminist anthropology is inclusive of birth anthropology as a specialization.
medical anthropology is an interdisciplinary field which studies "human health and disease, health care systems, and biocultural adaptation".
it is believed that william caudell was the first to discover the field of medical anthropology.
currently, research in medical anthropology is one of the main growth areas in the field of anthropology as a whole.
psychological anthropology is an interdisciplinary subfield of anthropology that studies the interaction of cultural and mental processes.
it also examines how the understanding of cognition, emotion, motivation, and similar psychological processes inform or constrain our models of cultural and social processes.
cognitive anthropology is concerned with what people from different groups know and how that implicit knowledge changes the way people perceive and relate to the world around them.
transpersonal anthropology studies the relationship between altered states of consciousness and culture.
as with transpersonal psychology, the field is much concerned with altered states of consciousness (asc) and transpersonal experience.
political anthropology concerns the structure of political systems, looked at from the basis of the structure of societies.
the turn towards complex societies meant that political themes were taken up at two main levels.
firstly, anthropologists continued to study political organization and political phenomena that lay outside the state-regulated sphere (as in patron-client relations or tribal political organization).
secondly, anthropologists slowly started to develop a disciplinary concern with states and their institutions (and on the relationship between formal and informal political institutions).
an anthropology of the state developed, and it is a most thriving field today.
geertz' comparative work on "negara", the balinese state, is an early, famous example.
legal anthropology or anthropology of law specializes in "the cross-cultural study of social ordering".
earlier legal anthropological research often focused more narrowly on conflict management, crime, sanctions, or formal regulation.
more recent applications include issues such as human rights, legal pluralism, and political uprisings.
cyborg anthropology originated as a sub-focus group within the american anthropological association's annual meeting in 1993.
the sub-group was very closely related to sts and the society for the social studies of science.
donna haraway's 1985 "cyborg manifesto" could be considered the founding document of cyborg anthropology by first exploring the philosophical and sociological ramifications of the term.
digital anthropology is the study of the relationship between humans and digital-era technology, and extends to various areas where anthropology and technology intersect.
it is sometimes grouped with sociocultural anthropology, and sometimes considered part of material culture.
the field is new, and thus has a variety of names with a variety of emphases.
these include techno-anthropology, digital ethnography, cyberanthropology, and virtual anthropology.
ecological anthropology is defined as the "study of cultural adaptations to environments".
the sub-field is also defined as, "the study of relationships between a population of humans and their biophysical environment".
many characterize this new perspective as more informed with culture, politics and power, globalization, localized issues, century anthropology and more.
the focus and data interpretation is often used for arguments for/against or creation of policy, and to prevent corporate exploitation and damage of land.
such is the case with environmental justice advocate melissa checker and her relationship with the people of hyde park.
ethnohistory is the study of ethnographic cultures and indigenous customs by examining historical records.
it is also the study of the history of various ethnic groups that may or may not exist today.
ethnohistory uses both historical and ethnographic data as its foundation.
its historical methods and materials go beyond the standard use of documents and manuscripts.
the anthropology of religion involves the study of religious institutions in relation to other social institutions, and the comparison of religious beliefs and practices across cultures.
urban anthropology is concerned with issues of urbanization, poverty, and neoliberalism.
ulf hannerz quotes a 1960s remark that traditional anthropologists were "a notoriously agoraphobic lot, anti-urban by definition".
there are two main approaches to urban anthropology: examining the types of cities or examining the social issues within the cities.
these two methods are overlapping and dependent of each other.
by defining different types of cities, one would use social factors as well as economic and political factors to categorize the cities.
by directly looking at the different social issues, one would also be studying how they affect the dynamic of the city.
anthrozoology (also known as "human–animal studies") is the study of interaction between living things.
it is an interdisciplinary field that overlaps with a number of other disciplines, including anthropology, ethology, medicine, psychology, veterinary medicine and zoology.
a major focus of anthrozoologic research is the quantifying of the positive effects of human-animal relationships on either party and the study of their interactions.
it includes scholars from a diverse range of fields, including anthropology, sociology, biology, and philosophy.
biocultural anthropology is the scientific exploration of the relationships between human biology and culture.
after world war ii the emphasis began to shift toward an effort to explore the role culture plays in shaping human biology.
evolutionary anthropology is the interdisciplinary study of the evolution of human physiology and human behaviour and the relation between hominins and non-hominin primates.
evolutionary anthropology is based in natural science and social science, combining the human development with socioeconomic factors.
evolutionary anthropology is concerned with both biological and cultural evolution of humans, past and present.
it is based on a scientific approach, and brings together fields such as archaeology, behavioral ecology, psychology, primatology, and genetics.
it is a dynamic and interdisciplinary field, drawing on many lines of evidence to understand the human experience, past and present.
a forensic anthropologist can assist in the identification of deceased individuals whose remains are decomposed, burned, mutilated or otherwise unrecognizable.
the adjective "forensic" refers to the application of this subfield of science to a court of law.
paleoanthropology combines the disciplines of paleontology and physical anthropology.
it is the study of ancient humans, as found in fossil hominid evidence such as petrifacted bones and footprints.
genetics and morphology of specimens are crucially important to this field.
markers on specimens, such as enamel fractures and dental decay on teeth, can also give insight into the behaviour and diet of past populations.
contemporary anthropology is an established science with academic departments at most universities and colleges.
the single largest organization of anthropologists is the american anthropological association (aaa), which was founded in 1903.
its members are anthropologists from around the globe.
anthropologists, like other researchers (especially historians and scientists engaged in field research), have over time assisted state policies and projects, especially colonialism.
this is the notion that cultures should not be judged by another's values or viewpoints, but be examined dispassionately on their own terms.
there should be no notions, in good anthropology, of one culture being better or worse than another culture.
ethical commitments in anthropology include noticing and documenting genocide, infanticide, racism, mutilation (including circumcision and subincision), and torture.
anthropologists' involvement with the u.s. government, in particular, has caused bitter controversy within the discipline.
many served in the armed forces, while others worked in intelligence (for example, office of strategic services and the office of war information).
attempts to accuse anthropologists of complicity with the cia and government intelligence activities during the vietnam war years have turned up surprisingly little.
many anthropologists (students and teachers) were active in the antiwar movement.
numerous resolutions condemning the war in all its aspects were passed overwhelmingly at the annual meetings of the american anthropological association (aaa).
professional anthropological bodies often object to the use of anthropology for the benefit of the state.
their codes of ethics or statements may proscribe anthropologists from giving secret briefings.
the association of social anthropologists of the uk and commonwealth (asa) has called certain scholarship ethically dangerous.
the current "principles of professional responsibility" does not make explicit mention of ethics surrounding state interactions.
anthropologists, along with other social scientists, are working with the us military as part of the us army's strategy in afghanistan.
before wwii british 'social anthropology' and american 'cultural anthropology' were still distinct traditions.
there are several characteristics that tend to unite anthropological work.
one of the central characteristics is that anthropology tends to provide a comparatively more holistic account of phenomena and tends to be highly empirical.
biological anthropologists are interested in both human variation and in the possibility of human universals (behaviors, ideas or concepts shared by virtually all human cultures).
on the biological or physical side, human measurements, genetic samples, nutritional data may be gathered and published as articles or monographs.
along with dividing up their project by theoretical emphasis, anthropologists typically divide the world up into relevant time periods and geographic regions.
human time on earth is divided up into relevant cultural traditions based on material, such as the paleolithic and the neolithic, of particular use in archaeology.
further cultural subdivisions according to tool types, such as olduwan or mousterian or levalloisian help archaeologists and other anthropologists in understanding major trends in the human past.
anthropologists and geographers share approaches to culture regions as well, since mapping cultures is central to both sciences.
now there exist many works focusing on peoples and topics very close to the author's "home".
it is also argued that other fields of study, like history and sociology, on the contrary focus disproportionately on the west.
(veterinary science, but not animal science, is often excluded from the definition.)
the three terms are often confused.
in the 18th century, johann friedrich mayer conducted experiments on the use of gypsum (hydrated calcium sulphate) as a fertilizer.
in the united states, a scientific revolution in agriculture began with the hatch act of 1887, which used the term "agricultural science".
the hatch act was driven by farmers' interest in knowing the constituents of early artificial fertilizer.
the smith-hughes act of 1917 shifted agricultural education back to its vocational roots, but the scientific foundation had been built.
after 1906, public expenditures on agricultural research in the us exceeded private expenditures for the next 44 years.
alchemists attempted to purify, mature, and perfect certain materials.
in europe, the creation of a philosopher's stone was variously connected with all of these projects.
islamic and european alchemists developed a structure of basic laboratory techniques, theory, terminology, and experimental method, some of which are still in use today.
however, they continued antiquity's belief in four elements and guarded their work in secrecy including cyphers and cryptic symbolism.
their work was guided by hermetic principles related to magic, mythology, and religion.
the latter interests historians of esotericism, psychologists, and some philosophers and spiritualists.
the subject has also made an ongoing impact on literature and the arts.
these ideas about alchemy emerged during the eighteenth century or after.
while each of them might have limited validity within a narrow context, none of them is an accurate depiction of alchemy in general."
the word alchemy comes from old french "alquemie", "alkimie", used in medieval latin as "alchymia".
together this association can be interpreted as 'the process of transmutation by which to fuse or reunite with the divine or original form'.
several etymologies have been proposed for the greek term.
the first was proposed by zosimos of panopolis (3rd–4th cent.
ce), who derived it from the name of a book, the "khemeu."
hermanm diels argued in 1914 that it rather derived from χύμα, used to describe metallic objects formed by casting.
this coptic word derives from demotic "kmỉ", itself from ancient egyptian "kmt".
alchemy encompasses several philosophical traditions spanning some four millennia and three continents.
these traditions' general penchant for cryptic and symbolic language makes it hard to trace their mutual influences and "genetic" relationships.
chinese alchemy was closely connected to taoism and indian alchemy with the dharmic faiths.
in contrast, western alchemy developed its philosophical system mostly independent of but influenced by various western religions.
it is still an open question whether these three strands share a common origin, or to what extent they influenced each other.
tracing the origins of the alchemical art in egypt is complicated by the pseudepigraphic nature of texts from the greek alchemical corpus.
the treatises of zosimos of panopolis, the earliest, historically-attested author (fl.
c. 300 ce), can however help in situating the other authors.
the most complete of their works, the "four books" of pseudo-democritus, were probably written in the first century ce.
recent scholarship tend to emphasizes the testimony of zosimus, who traced the alchemical arts back to egyptian metallurgical and ceremonial practices.
it has also been argued that early alchemical writers borrowed the vocabulary of greek philosophical schools but did not implement any of its doctrines in a systematic way.
zosimos of panopolis wrote in the "final abstinence" (also known as the "final count").
alchemical writers used classical figures from greek, roman, and egyptian mythology to illuminate their works and allegorize alchemical transmutation.
these included the pantheon of gods related to the classical planets, isis, osiris, jason, and many others.
the central figure in the mythology of alchemy is hermes trismegistus (or thrice-great hermes).
his name is derived from the god thoth and his greek counterpart hermes.
hermes and his caduceus or serpent-staff, were among alchemy's principal symbols.
according to clement of alexandria, he wrote what were called the "forty-two books of hermes", covering all fields of knowledge.
these writings were collected in the first centuries of the common era.
technology – the dawn of western alchemy is sometimes associated with that of metallurgy, extending back to 3500 .
many writings were lost when the emperor diocletian ordered the burning of alchemical books after suppressing a revolt in alexandria ( 292).
few original egyptian documents on alchemy have survived, most notable among them the stockholm papyrus and the leyden papyrus x.
dating from  250–300, they contained recipes for dyeing and making artificial gemstones, cleaning and fabricating pearls, and manufacturing of imitation gold and silver.
between the time of bolus and zosimos, the change took place that transformed this metallurgy into a hermetic art.
philosophy – alexandria acted as a melting pot for philosophies of pythagoreanism, platonism, stoicism and gnosticism which formed the origin of alchemy's character.
according to aristotle, each element had a sphere to which it belonged and to which it would return if left undisturbed.
later alchemists extensively developed the mystical aspects of this concept.
alchemy coexisted alongside emerging christianity.
lactantius believed hermes trismegistus had prophesied its birth.
st augustine later affirmed this in the 4th & 5th centuries, but also condemned trismegistus for idolatry.
examples of pagan, christian, and jewish alchemists can be found during this period.
most of the greco-roman alchemists preceding zosimos are known only by pseudonyms, such as moses, isis, cleopatra, democritus, and ostanes.
others authors such as komarios, and chymes, we only know through fragments of text.
after  400, greek alchemical writers occupied themselves solely in commenting on the works of these predecessors.
by the middle of the 7th century alchemy was almost an entirely mystical discipline.
the 2nd millennium bc text vedas describe a connection between eternal life and gold.
buddhist texts from the 2nd to 5th centuries mention the transmutation of base metals to gold.
according to some scholars greek alchemy may have influenced indian alchemy but there are no hard evidences to back this claim.
some early alchemical writings seem to have their origins in the kaula tantric schools associated to the teachings of the personality of matsyendranath.
other early writings are found in the jaina medical treatise "kalyāṇakārakam" of ugrāditya, written in south india in the early 9th century.
two famous early indian alchemical authors were nāgārjuna siddha and nityanātha siddha.
nāgārjuna siddha was a buddhist monk.
his book, "rasendramangalam", is an example of indian alchemy and medicine.
nityanātha siddha wrote "rasaratnākara", also a highly influential work.
in sanskrit, "rasa" translates to "mercury", and nāgārjuna siddha was said to have developed a method of converting mercury into gold.
scholarship on indian alchemy is in the publication of "the alchemical body" by david gordon white.
a modern bibliography on indian alchemical studies has been written by white.
the contents of 39 sanskrit alchemical treatises have been analysed in detail in g. jan meulenbeld's "history of indian medical literature".
a great deal remains to be discovered about indian alchemical literature.
the content of the sanskrit alchemical corpus has not yet (2014) been adequately integrated into the wider general history of alchemy.
after the fall of the roman empire, the focus of alchemical development moved to the islamic world.
the word "alchemy" itself was derived from the arabic word "al-kīmiyā" (الكيمياء).
the early islamic world was a melting pot for alchemy.
jabir is thus "considered by many to be the father of chemistry", albeit others reserve that title for robert boyle or antoine lavoisier.
islamic philosophers also made great contributions to alchemical hermeticism.
the most influential author in this regard was arguably jabir.
jabir's ultimate goal was "takwin", the artificial creation of life in the alchemical laboratory, up to, and including, human life.
he analyzed each aristotelian element in terms of four basic qualities of "hotness", "coldness", "dryness", and "moistness".
according to jabir, in each metal two of these qualities were interior and two were exterior.
for example, lead was externally cold and dry, while gold was hot and moist.
thus, jabir theorized, by rearranging the qualities of one metal, a different metal would result.
by this reasoning, the search for the philosopher's stone was introduced to western alchemy.
the elemental system used in medieval alchemy also originated with jabir.
in particular, they wrote refutations against the idea of the transmutation of metals.
whereas european alchemy eventually centered on the transmutation of base metals into noble metals, chinese alchemy had a more obvious connection to medicine.
the philosopher's stone of european alchemists can be compared to the grand elixir of immortality sought by chinese alchemists.
black powder may have been an important invention of chinese alchemists.
as previously stated above, chinese alchemy was more related to medicine.
it is said that the chinese invented gunpowder while trying to find a potion for eternal life.
described in 9th-century texts and used in fireworks in china by the 10th century, it was used in cannons by 1290.
from china, the use of gunpowder spread to japan, the mongols, the muslim world, and europe.
gunpowder was used by the mongols against the hungarians in 1241, and in europe by the 14th century.
chinese alchemy was closely connected to taoist forms of traditional chinese medicine, such as acupuncture and moxibustion.
although european craftsmen and technicians preexisted, robert notes in his preface that alchemy was unknown in latin europe at the time of his writing.
the translation of arabic texts concerning numerous disciplines including alchemy flourished in 12th-century toledo, spain, through contributors like gerard of cremona and adelard of bath.
translations of the time included the turba philosophorum, and the works of avicenna and al-razi.
these brought with them many new words to the european vocabulary for which there was no previous latin equivalent.
alcohol, carboy, elixir, and athanor are examples.
meanwhile, theologian contemporaries of the translators made strides towards the reconciliation of faith and experimental rationalism, thereby priming europe for the influx of alchemical thought.
the 11th-century st anselm put forth the opinion that faith and rationalism were compatible and encouraged rationalism in a christian context.
grosseteste also did much work to reconcile platonic and aristotelian thinking.
through much of the 12th and 13th centuries, alchemical knowledge in europe remained centered on translations, and new latin contributions were not made.
the efforts of the translators were succeeded by that of the encyclopaedists.
albertus critically compared these to the writings of aristotle and avicenna, where they concerned the transmutation of metals.
likewise, alchemical texts have been attributed to albert's student thomas aquinas.
bacon's writings integrated morality, salvation, alchemy, and the prolongation of life.
his correspondence with clement highlighted this, noting the importance of alchemy to the papacy.
like the greeks before him, bacon acknowledged the division of alchemy into practical and theoretical spheres.
he noted that the theoretical lay outside the scope of aristotle, the natural philosophers, and all latin writers of his time.
the practical, however, confirmed the theoretical thought experiment, and bacon advocated its uses in natural science and medicine.
in later european legend, however, bacon became an archmage.
in particular, along with albertus magnus, he was credited with the forging of a brazen head capable of answering its owner's questions.
soon after bacon, the influential work of pseudo-geber (sometimes identified as paul of taranto) appeared.
his "summa perfectionis" remained a staple summary of alchemical practice and theory through the medieval and renaissance periods.
it was notable for its inclusion of practical chemical operations alongside sulphur-mercury theory, and the unusual clarity with which they were described.
by the end of the 13th century, alchemy had developed into a fairly structured system of belief.
finally, the alchemists practiced their art: they actively experimented with chemicals and made observations and theories about how the universe operated.
their entire philosophy revolved around their belief that man's soul was divided within himself after the fall of adam.
by purifying the two parts of man's soul, man could be reunited with god.
in the 14th century, alchemy became more accessible to europeans outside the confines of latin speaking churchmen and scholars.
alchemical discourse shifted from scholarly philosophical debate to an exposed social commentary on the alchemists themselves.
dante, piers plowman, and chaucer all painted unflattering pictures of alchemists as thieves and liars.
pope john xxii's 1317 edict, "spondent quas non-exhibent" forbade the false promises of transmutation made by pseudo-alchemists.
these critiques and regulations centered more around pseudo-alchemical charlatanism than the actual study of alchemy, which continued with an increasingly christian tone.
although the historical flamel existed, the writings and legends assigned to him only appeared in 1612.
his work spends a great deal of time describing the processes and reactions, but never actually gives the formula for carrying out the transmutations.
most of 'his' work was aimed at gathering alchemical knowledge that had existed before him, especially as regarded the philosopher's stone.
through the 14th and 15th centuries, alchemists were much like flamel: they concentrated on looking for the philosophers' stone.
bernard trevisan and george ripley made similar contributions.
their cryptic allusions and symbolism led to wide variations in interpretation of the art.
during the renaissance, hermetic and platonic foundations were restored to european alchemy.
the dawn of medical, pharmaceutical, occult, and entrepreneurial branches of alchemy followed.
in the late 15th century, marsilo ficino translated the corpus hermeticum and the works of plato into latin.
these were previously unavailable to europeans who for the first time had a full picture of the alchemical theory that bacon had declared absent.
renaissance humanism and renaissance neoplatonism guided alchemists away from physics to refocus on mankind as the alchemical vessel.
esoteric systems developed that blended alchemy into a broader occult hermeticism, fusing it with magic, astrology, and christian cabala.
a key figure in this development was german heinrich cornelius agrippa (1486–1535), who received his hermetic education in italy in the schools of the humanists.
in his "de occulta philosophia", he attempted to merge kabbalah, hermeticism, and alchemy.
he was instrumental in spreading this new blend of hermeticism outside the borders of italy.
for me such is not the aim, but to consider only what virtue and power may lie in medicines."
his hermetical views were that sickness and health in the body relied on the harmony of man the microcosm and nature the macrocosm.
iatrochemistry also refers to the pharmaceutical applications of alchemy championed by paracelsus.
john dee (13 july 1527 – december, 1608) followed agrippa's occult tradition.
his writing portrayed alchemy as a sort of terrestrial astronomy in line with the hermetic axiom "as above so below".
proponents of the supernatural interpretation of alchemy believed that the philosopher's stone might be used to summon and communicate with angels.
entrepreneurial opportunities were common for the alchemists of renaissance europe.
alchemists were contracted by the elite for practical purposes related to mining, medical services, and the production of chemicals, medicines, metals, and gemstones.
although most of these appointments were legitimate, the trend of pseudo-alchemical fraud continued through the renaissance.
"betrüger" would use sleight of hand, or claims of secret knowledge to make money or secure patronage.
legitimate mystical and medical alchemists such as michael maier and heinrich khunrath wrote about fraudulent transmutations, distinguishing themselves from the con artists.
false alchemists were sometimes prosecuted for fraud.
there were important overlaps between practitioners, and trying to classify them into alchemists, chemists and craftsmen is anachronistic.
sendivogious taught his technique to cornelius drebbel who, in 1621, applied this in a submarine.
other early modern alchemists who were eminent in their other studies include robert boyle, and jan baptist van helmont.
their hermeticism complemented rather than precluded their practical achievements in medicine and science.
as late as 1781 james price claimed to have produced a powder that could transmute mercury into silver or gold.
robert boyle (1627–1691) pioneered the scientific method in chemical investigations.
he assumed nothing in his experiments and compiled every piece of relevant data.
this approach eventually led to the founding of modern chemistry in the 18th and 19th centuries, based on revolutionary discoveries of lavoisier and john dalton.
beginning around 1720, a rigid distinction began to be drawn for the first time between "alchemy" and "chemistry".
this move was mostly successful, and the consequences of this continued into the 19th, 20th and 21st centuries.
during the occult revival of the early 19th century, alchemy received new attention as an occult science.
atwood's work influenced subsequent authors of the occult revival including eliphas levi, arthur edward waite, and rudolf steiner.
in 1946, louis cattiaux published the message retrouvé, a work that was at once philosophical, mystical and highly influenced by alchemy.
in his lineage, many researchers, including emmanuel and charles d'hooghvorst, are updating alchemical studies in france and belgium.
several women appear in the earliest history of alchemy.
michael maier names mary the jewess, cleopatra the alchemist, medera, and taphnutia as the four women who knew how to make the philosopher's stone.
zosimos' sister theosebia (later known as euthica the arab) and isis the prophetess also played a role in early alchemical texts.
the first alchemist whose name we know is said to have been mary the jewess (c. 200 a.d.).
early sources claim that mary (or maria) devised a number of improvements to alchemical equipment and tools as well as novel techniques in chemistry.
her best known advances were in heating and distillation processes.
the laboratory water-bath, known eponymously (especially in france) as the bain-marie, is said to have been invented or at least improved by her.
essentially a double-boiler, it was (and is) used in chemistry for processes that require gentle heating.
the occasional claim that mary was the first to discover hydrochloric acid is not accepted by most authorities.
although we have no writing from mary herself, she is known from the early-fourth-century writings of zosimos of panopolis.
due to the proliferation of pseudepigrapha and anonymous works, it is difficult to know which of the alchemists were actually women.
after the greco-roman period, women's names appear less frequently in the alchemical literature.
women vacate the history of alchemy during the medieval and renaissance periods, aside from the fictitious account of perenelle flamel.
mary anne atwood's "a suggestive inquiry into the hermetic mystery" (1850) marks their return during the nineteenth-century occult revival.
the history of alchemy has become a significant and recognized subject of academic study.
a large collection of books on alchemy is kept in the bibliotheca philosophica hermetica in amsterdam.
a recipe found in a mid-19th-century kabbalah based book features step by step instructions on turning copper into gold.
the author attributed this recipe to an ancient manuscript he located.
western alchemical theory corresponds to the worldview of late antiquity in which it was born.
concepts were imported from neoplatonism and earlier greek cosmology.
as such, the classical elements appear in alchemical writings, as do the seven classical planets and the corresponding seven metals of antiquity.
similarly, the gods of the roman pantheon who are associated with these luminaries are discussed in alchemical literature.
the concepts of prima materia and anima mundi are central to the theory of the philosopher's stone.
in the eyes of a variety of esoteric and hermetic practitioners, alchemy is fundamentally spiritual.
transmutation of lead into gold is presented as an analogy for personal transmutation, purification, and perfection.
the writings attributed to hermes trismegistus are a primary source of alchemical theory.
he is named "alchemy's founder and chief patron, authority, inspiration and guide".
in this sense, the literal meanings of 'alchemical formulas' were a blind, hiding their true spiritual philosophy.
these scholars have reconstructed physicochemical experiments that they say are described in medieval and early modern texts.
today new interpretations of alchemy are still perpetuated, sometimes merging in concepts from new age or radical environmentalism movements.
groups like the rosicrucians and freemasons have a continued interest in alchemy and its symbolism.
traditional medicine can use the concept of the transmutation of natural substances, using pharmacological or a combination of pharmacological and spiritual techniques.
in ayurveda, the samskaras are claimed to transform heavy metals and toxic herbs in a way that removes their toxicity.
these processes are actively used to the present day.
spagyrists of the 20th century, albert richard riedel and jean dubuis, merged paracelsian alchemy with occultism, teaching laboratory pharmaceutical methods.
the courses, books, organizations, and conferences generated by their students continue to influence popular applications of alchemy as a new age medicinal practice.
alchemical symbolism has been important in depth and analytical psychology and was revived and popularized from near extinction by the swiss psychologist carl gustav jung.
a process, which he called "process of individuation".
both von franz and jung have contributed greatly to the subject and work of alchemy and its continued presence in psychology as well as contemporary culture.
jung wrote volumes on alchemy and his magnum opus is volume 14 of his collected works, "mysterium coniunctionis".
alchemy has had a long-standing relationship with art, seen both in alchemical texts and in mainstream entertainment.
"literary alchemy" appears throughout the history of english literature from shakespeare to j. k. rowling, and also the popular japanese manga "fullmetal alchemist".
here, characters or plot structure follow an alchemical magnum opus.
in the 14th century, chaucer began a trend of alchemical satire that can still be seen in recent fantasy works like those of terry pratchett.
visual artists had a similar relationship with alchemy.
while some of them used alchemy as a source of satire, others worked with the alchemists themselves or integrated alchemical thought or symbols in their work.
music was also present in the works of alchemists and continues to influence popular performers.
one goal of alchemy, synthesizing gold, is now technologically possible, though not financially practical.
gold has been synthesized in particle accelerators as early as 1941.
alien primarily refers to: alien(s), or the alien(s) may also refer to:
an astronomer is a scientist in the field of astronomy who focuses their studies on a specific question or field outside the scope of earth.
they observe astronomical objects such as stars, planets, moons, comets and galaxies – in either observational (by analyzing the data) or theoretical astronomy.
examples of topics or fields astronomers study include planetary science, solar astronomy, the origin or evolution of stars, or the formation of galaxies.
related but distinct subjects like physical cosmology, which studies the universe as a whole.
astronomers usually fall under either of two main types: observational and theoretical.
observational astronomers make direct observations of celestial objects and analyze the data.
in contrast, theoretical astronomers create and investigate models of things that cannot be observed.
they use these data to create models or simulations to theorize how different celestial objects work.
further subcategories under these two main branches of astronomy include planetary astronomy, galactic astronomy, or physical cosmology.
today, that distinction has mostly disappeared and the terms "astronomer" and "astrophysicist" are interchangeable.
professional astronomers are highly educated individuals who typically have a phd in physics or astronomy and are employed by research institutions or universities.
the number of professional astronomers in the united states is actually quite small.
the american astronomical society, which is the major organization of professional astronomers in north america, has approximately 7,000 members.
this number includes scientists from other fields such as physics, geology, and engineering, whose research interests are closely related to astronomy.
the international astronomical union comprises almost 10,145 members from 70 different countries who are involved in astronomical research at the phd level and beyond.
before ccds, photographic plates were a common method of observation.
modern astronomers spend relatively little time at telescopes usually just a few weeks per year.
analysis of observed phenomena, along with making predictions as to the causes of what they observe, takes the majority of observational astronomers' time.
astronomers who serve as faculty spend much of their time teaching undergraduate and graduate classes.
most universities also have outreach programs including public telescope time and sometimes planetariums as a public service to encourage interest in the field.
those who become astronomers usually have a broad background in maths, sciences and computing in high school.
taking courses that teach how to research, write and present papers are also invaluable.
in college/university most astronomers get a phd in astronomy or physics.
while there is a relatively low number of professional astronomers, the field is popular among amateurs.
most cities have amateur astronomy clubs that meet on a regular basis and often host star parties.
ascii ( ), abbreviated from american standard code for information interchange, is a character encoding standard for electronic communication.
ascii codes represent text in computers, telecommunications equipment, and other devices.
most modern character-encoding schemes are based on ascii, although they support many additional characters.
the internet assigned numbers authority (iana) prefers the name us-ascii for this character encoding.
ascii is one of the ieee milestones.
ascii was developed from telegraph code.
its first commercial use was as a seven-bit teleprinter code promoted by bell data services.
the first edition of the standard was published in 1963, underwent a major revision during 1967, and experienced its most recent update during 1986.
the use of ascii format for network interchange was described in 1969.
that document was formally elevated to an internet standard in 2015.
originally based on the english alphabet, ascii encodes 128 specified characters into seven-bit integers as shown by the ascii chart above.
the asa became the united states of america standards institute (usasi) and ultimately the american national standards institute (ansi).
there was some debate at the time whether there should be more control characters rather than the lowercase alphabet.
the x3.2.4 task group voted its approval for the change to ascii at its may 1963 meeting.
ascii was subsequently updated as usas x3.4-1967, then usas x3.4-1968, ansi x3.4-1977, and finally, ansi x3.4-1986.
they proposed a 9-track standard for magnetic tape, and attempted to deal with some punched card formats.
the x3.2 subcommittee designed ascii based on the earlier teleprinter encoding systems.
like other character encodings, ascii specifies a correspondence between digital bit patterns and character symbols (i.e.
graphemes and control characters).
this allows digital devices to communicate with each other and to process, store, and communicate character-oriented information such as written language.
before ascii was developed, the encodings in use included 26 alphabetic characters, 10 numerical digits, and from 11 to 25 special graphic symbols.
to include all these, and control characters compatible with the comité consultatif international téléphonique et télégraphique (ccitt) international telegraph alphabet no.
2 (ita2) standard of 1924, fieldata (1956), and early ebcdic (1963), more than 64 codes were required for ascii.
ita2 were in turn based on the 5-bit telegraph code émile baudot invented in 1870 and patented in 1874.
in a shifted code, some character codes determine choices between options for the following character codes.
the standards committee decided against shifting, and so ascii required at least a seven-bit code.
the committee considered an eight-bit code, since eight bits (octets) would allow two four-bit patterns to efficiently encode two digits with binary-coded decimal.
however, it would require all data transmission to send eight bits when seven could suffice.
the committee voted to use a seven-bit code to minimize costs associated with data transmission.
since perforated tape at the time could record eight bits in one position, it also allowed for a parity bit for error checking if desired.
eight-bit machines (with octets as the native data type) that did not use parity checking typically set the eighth bit to 0.
in some printers, the high bit was used to enable italics printing.
the code itself was patterned so that most control codes were together and all graphic codes were together, for ease of identification.
the first two so-called "ascii sticks" (32 positions) were reserved for control characters.
lowercase letters were therefore not interleaved with uppercase.
the digits 0–9 are prefixed with 011, but the remaining 4 bits correspond to their respective values in binary, making conversion with binary-coded decimal straightforward.
mechanical typewriters followed the standard set by the remington no.
thus, in ascii codice_5 were placed in the second stick, positions 1–5, corresponding to the digits 1–5 in the adjacent stick.
the codice_7 pair also dates to the no.
2, and the codice_8 pairs were used on some keyboards (others, including the no.
2, did not shift codice_9 (comma) or codice_10 (full stop) so they could be used in uppercase without unshifting).
however, ascii split the codice_11 pair (dating to no.
2), and rearranged mathematical symbols (varied conventions, commonly codice_12) to codice_13.
(wru), "are you?"
(ru), a reserved device control (dc0), synchronous idle (sync), and acknowledge (ack).
these were positioned to maximize the hamming distance between their bit patterns.
ascii-code order is also called "asciibetical" order.
collation of data is sometimes done in this order rather than "standard" alphabetical order (collating sequence).
the main deviations in ascii order are: an intermediate order converts uppercase letters to lowercase before comparing ascii values.
refers to control characters that do not include carriage return, line feed or white space as non-whitespace control characters.
except for the control characters that prescribe elementary line-oriented formatting, ascii does not define any mechanism for describing the structure or appearance of text within a document.
other schemes, such as markup languages, address page and document layout and formatting.
the original ascii standard used only short descriptive phrases for each control character.
paper tape was a very popular medium for long-term program storage until the 1980s, less costly and in some ways less fragile than magnetic tape.
on some systems control-s retains its meaning but control-q is replaced by a second control-s to resume output.
the teletype could not move the head backwards, so it did not put a key on the keyboard to send a bs (backspace).
instead there was a key marked that sent code 127 (del).
the assumption that no key sent a bs caused control+h to be used for other purposes, such as the "help" prefix command in gnu emacs.
many more of the control codes have been given meanings quite different from their original ones.
this is the same meaning of "escape" encountered in url encodings, c language strings, and other systems where certain characters have a reserved meaning.
over time this meaning has been co-opted and has eventually been changed.
an esc sent from the terminal is most often used as an out-of-band character used to terminate an operation, as in the teco and vi text editors.
in graphical user interface (gui) and windowing systems, esc generally causes an application to abort its current operation or to exit (terminate) altogether.
the inherent ambiguity of many control characters, combined with their historical usage, created problems when transferring "plain text" files between systems.
the best example of this is the newline problem on various operating systems.
the entire carriage had to be pushed (returned) to the right in order to position the left margin of the paper for the next line.
dec operating systems (os/8, rt-11, rsx-11, rsts, tops-10, etc.)
used both characters to mark the end of a line so that the console device (originally teletype machines) would work.
when gary kildall created cp/m he was inspired by some command line interface conventions used in dec's rt-11.
unfortunately, requiring two characters to mark the end of a line introduces unnecessary complexity and questions as to how to interpret each character when encountered alone.
to simplify matters plain text data streams, including files, on multics used line feed (lf) alone as a line terminator.
unix and unix-like systems, and amiga systems, adopted this convention from multics.
the radio shack trs-80 also used a lone cr to terminate lines.
telnet used ascii along with cr-lf line endings, and software using other conventions would translate between the local conventions and the nvt.
the pdp-6 monitor, and its pdp-10 successor tops-10, used control-z (sub) as an end-of-file indication for input from a terminal.
for these reasons, eof, or end-of-file, was used colloquially and conventionally as a three-letter acronym for control-z instead of substitute.
a historically common and still prevalent convention uses the etx code convention to interrupt and halt a program via an input data stream, usually from a keyboard.
other representations might be used by specialist equipment, for example iso 2047 graphics or hexadecimal numbers.
codes 20 to 7e, known as the printable characters, represent letters, digits, punctuation marks, and a few miscellaneous symbols.
there are 95 printable characters in total.
code 20, the "space" character, denotes the space between words, as produced by the space bar of a keyboard.
earlier versions of ascii used the up arrow instead of the caret (5e) and the left arrow instead of the underscore (5f). ]]
points which represented a different character in previous versions (the 1963 version and/or the 1965 draft) are shown boxed.
points assigned since the 1963 version but otherwise unchanged are shown lightly shaded relative to their legend colours.
ascii was first used commercially during 1963 as a seven-bit teleprinter code for american telephone & telegraph's twx (teletypewriter exchange) network.
twx originally used the earlier five-bit ita2, which was also used by the competing telex teleprinter system.
bob bemer introduced features such as the escape sequence.
because of his extensive work on ascii, bemer has been called "the father of ascii".
ascii was the most common character encoding on the world wide web until december 2007, when utf-8 encoding surpassed it; utf-8 is backward compatible with ascii.
furthermore, the ascii extensions have also been mislabelled as ascii.
from early in its development, ascii was intended to be just one of several national variants of an international character code standard.
almost every country needed an adapted version of ascii, since ascii suited the needs of only the us and a few other countries.
for example, canada had its own version that supported french characters.
many other countries developed variants of ascii to include non-english letters (e.g.
é, ñ, ß, ł), currency symbols (e.g.
£, ¥), etc.
see also yuscii (yugoslavia).
it would share most characters in common, but assign other locally useful characters to several code points reserved for "national use".
iso/iec 646, like ascii, is a 7-bit character set.
it does not make any additional codes available, so the same code points encoded different characters in different countries.
many programmers kept their computers on us-ascii, so plain-text in swedish, german etc.
encodings include iscii (india), viscii (vietnam).
although these encodings are sometimes referred to as ascii, true ascii is defined strictly only by the ansi standard.
kaypro cp/m computers used the "upper" 128 characters for the greek alphabet.
atari 8-bit computers and galaksija computers also used ascii variants.
operating systems such as dos supported these code pages, and manufacturers of ibm pcs supported them in hardware.
a popular further extension designed by microsoft, windows-1252 (often mislabeled as iso-8859-1), added the typographic punctuation marks needed for traditional text printing.
iso-8859-1, windows-1252, and the original 7-bit ascii were the most common character encodings until 2008 when utf-8 became more common.
iso/iec 4873 introduced 32 additional control codes defined in the 80–9f hexadecimal range, as part of extending the 7-bit ascii encoding to become an 8-bit system.
austin is the capital of texas in the united states.
austin may also refer to:
animation is a method in which figures are manipulated to appear as moving images.
in traditional animation, images are drawn or painted by hand on transparent celluloid sheets to be photographed and exhibited on film.
today, most animations are made with computer-generated imagery (cgi).
computer animation can be very detailed 3d animation, while 2d computer animation can be used for stylistic reasons, low bandwidth or faster real-time renderings.
other common animation methods apply a stop motion technique to two and three-dimensional objects like paper cutouts, puppets or clay figures.
commonly the effect of animation is achieved by a rapid succession of sequential images that minimally differ from each other.
the illusion—as in motion pictures in general—is thought to rely on the phi phenomenon and beta movement, but the exact causes are still uncertain.
analog mechanical animation media that rely on the rapid display of sequential images include the phénakisticope, zoetrope, flip book, praxinoscope and film.
television and video are popular electronic animation media that originally were analog and now operate digitally.
for display on the computer, techniques like animated gif and flash animation were developed.
animation is more pervasive than many people realize.
the physical movement of image parts through simple mechanics—in for instance moving images in magic lantern shows—can also be considered animation.
the mechanical manipulation of three-dimensional puppets and objects to emulate living beings has a very long history in automata.
electronic automata were popularized by disney as animatronics.
animators are artists who specialize in creating animation.
the word "animation" stems from the latin "animātiōn", stem of "animātiō", meaning "a bestowing of life".
the primary meaning of the english word is "liveliness" and has been in use much longer than the meaning of "moving image medium".
the stroboscopic animation principle was also applied in the zoetrope (1866), the flip book (1868) and the praxinoscope (1877).
the average 19th-century animation contained about 12 images that were displayed as a continuous loop by spinning a device manually.
the flip book often contained more pictures and had a beginning and end, but its animation would not last longer than a few seconds.
it would take some more years before animation reached movie theatres.
émile cohl's "fantasmagorie" (1908) is the oldest known example of what became known as traditional (hand-drawn) animation.
during the 1910s, the production of animated "cartoons" became an industry in the us.
successful producer john randolph bray and animator earl hurd, patented the cel animation process that dominated the animation industry for the rest of the century.
felix the cat, who debuted in 1919, became the first animated superstar.
in 1932, disney also introduced the innovation of full colour (in "flowers and trees") as part of a three-year-long exclusive deal with technicolor.
the enormous success of mickey mouse is seen as the start of the golden age of american animation that would last until the 1960s.
the united states dominated the world market of animation with a plethora of cel-animated theatrical shorts.
in 1917, italian-argentine director quirino cristiani made the first feature-length film "el apóstol" (now lost), which became a critical and commercial success.
it was followed by cristiani's "sin dejar rastros" in 1918, but one day after its premiere the film was confiscated by the government.
the fleischer studios followed this example in 1939 with "gulliver's travels" with some success.
sullivan-bluth studios began to regularly produce animated features starting with "an american tail" in 1986.
russia's soyuzmultfilm animation studio, founded in 1936, produced 20 films (including shorts) per year on average and reached 1,582 titles in 2018.
animation became very popular on television since the 1950s, when television sets started to become common in most developed countries.
cartoons were mainly programmed for children, on convenient time slots, and especially us youth spent many hours watching saturday-morning cartoons.
the constraints of american television programming and the demand for an enormous quantity resulted in cheaper and quicker limited animation methods and much more formulaic scripts.
while us animated series also spawned successes internationally, many other countries produced their own child-oriented programming, relatively often preferring stop motion and puppetry over cel animation.
computer animation was gradually developed since the 1940s.
"the rescuers down under" was the first feature film to be completely created digitally without a camera.
most of the cel animation studios switched to producing mostly computer animated films around the 1990s, as it proved cheaper and more profitable.
in 2008, the animation market was worth us$68.4 billion.
animated feature-length films returned the highest gross margins (around 52%) of all film genres between 2004 and 2013.
animation as an art and industry continues to thrive as of the early 2020s.
it has therefore been widely used for other purposes than mere entertainment.
during world war ii, animation was widely exploited for propaganda.
many american studios, including warner bros. and disney, lent their talents and their cartoon characters to convey the public of certain war values.
some countries, including china, japan and the united kingdom, produced their first feature-length animation for their war efforts.
animation has been very popular in television commercials, both due to its graphic appeal, and the humour it can provide.
some animated characters in commercials have survived for decades, such as snap, crackle and pop in advertisements for kellogg's cereals.
animation has traditionally been very closely related to comic books.
somewhat similarly, characters and plots for video games (an interactive animation medium) have been derived from films and vice versa.
some of the original content produced for the screen can be used and marketed in other media.
stories and images can easily be adapted into children's books and other printed media.
songs and music have appeared on records and as streaming media.
while very many animation companies commercially exploit their creations outside moving image media, the walt disney company is the best known and most extreme example.
disneyland opened in 1955 and features many attractions that were based on disney's cartoon characters.
its enormous success spawned several other disney theme parks and resorts.
disney's earnings from the theme parks has relatively often been higher than those from their movies.
criticism of animation has been common in media and cinema since its inception.
with its popularity, a large amount of criticism has arisen, especially animated feature-length films.
as with any other form of media, animation has instituted awards for excellence in the field.
the first winner of the academy award was the short "flowers and trees", a production by walt disney productions.
the academy award for a feature-length animated motion picture was only instituted for the year 2001, and awarded during the 74th academy awards in 2002.
it was won by the film "shrek", produced by dreamworks and pacific data images.
disney animation and pixar has produced the most films either to win or be nominated for the award.
"beauty and the beast" was the first animated film nominated for best picture.
"up" and "toy story 3" also received best picture nominations after the academy expanded the number of nominees from five to ten.
also since 2007, the asia pacific screen award for best animated feature film has been awarded at the asia pacific screen awards.
since 2009, the european film awards have awarded the european film award for best animated film.
the annie award is another award presented for excellence in the field of animation.
they were re-organized in 1992 to create a new field for best animated feature.
traits common to both live-action and animated feature-length films are labor intensity and high production costs.
while live-action films are now also storyboarded, they enjoy more latitude to depart from storyboards (i.e., real-time improvisation).
since the early 1980s, teams of about 500 to 600 people, of whom 50 to 70 are animators, typically have created feature-length animated films.
it is relatively easy for two or three artists to match their styles; synchronizing those of dozens of artists is more difficult.
this problem is usually solved by having a separate group of visual development artists develop an overall look and palette for each film before the animation begins.
on traditionally animated projects, maquettes were often sculpted to further help the animators see how characters would look from different angles.
traditional animation (also called cel animation or hand-drawn animation) was the process used for most animated films of the 20th century.
the individual frames of a traditionally animated film are photographs of drawings, first drawn on paper.
to create the illusion of movement, each drawing differs slightly from the one before it.
the completed character cels are photographed one-by-one against a painted background by a rostrum camera onto motion picture film.
the traditional cel animation process became obsolete by the beginning of the 21st century.
today, animators' drawings and the backgrounds are either scanned into or drawn directly into a computer system.
various software programs are used to color the drawings and simulate camera movement and effects.
the final animated piece is output to one of several delivery media, including traditional 35 mm film and newer media with digital video.
the "look" of traditional cel animation is still preserved, and the character animators' work has remained essentially the same over the past 70 years.
full animation refers to the process of producing high-quality traditionally animated films that regularly use detailed drawings and plausible movement, having a smooth animation.
limited animation involves the use of less detailed or more stylized drawings and methods of movement usually a choppy or "skippy" movement animation.
limited animation uses fewer drawings per second, thereby limiting the fluidity of the animation.
this is a more economic technique.
rotoscoping is a technique patented by max fleischer in 1917 where animators trace live-action movement, frame by frame.
live-action/animation is a technique combining hand-drawn characters into live action shots or live-action actors into animated shots.
one of the earlier uses was in koko the clown when koko was drawn over live-action footage.
walt disney and ub iwerks created a series of "alice comedies" (1923–1927), in which a live-action girl enters an animated world.
there are many different types of stop-motion animation, usually named after the medium used to create the animation.
computer software is widely available to create this type of animation; traditional stop-motion animation is usually less expensive but more time-consuming to produce than current computer animation.
computer animation encompasses a variety of techniques, the unifying factor being that the animation is created digitally on a computer.
2d animation techniques tend to focus on image manipulation while 3d techniques usually build virtual worlds in which characters and objects move and interact.
3d animation can create images that seem real to the viewer.
2d animation figures are created or edited on the computer using 2d bitmap graphics and 2d vector graphics.
this includes automated computerized versions of traditional animation techniques, interpolated morphing, onion skinning and interpolated rotoscoping.
2d animation has many applications, including analog computer animation, flash animation, and powerpoint animation.
cinemagraphs are still photographs in the form of an animated gif file of which part is animated.
3d animation is digitally modeled and manipulated by an animator.
the animator usually starts by creating a 3d polygon mesh to manipulate.
a mesh typically includes many vertices that are connected by edges and faces, which give the visual appearance of form to a 3d object or 3d environment.
sometimes, the mesh is given an internal digital skeletal structure called an armature that can be used to control the mesh by weighting the vertices.
this process is called rigging and can be used in conjunction with key frames to create movement.
these techniques fall under the category of 3d dynamics.
apollo is one of the olympian deities in classical greek and roman religion and greek and roman mythology.
apollo is known in greek-influenced etruscan mythology as "apulu".
as the patron deity of delphi ("apollo pythios"), apollo is an oracular god—the prophetic deity of the delphic oracle.
apollo is the god who affords help and wards off evil; various epithets call him the "averter of evil".
delphic apollo is the patron of seafarers, foreigners and the protector of fugitives and refugees.
medicine and healing are associated with apollo, whether through the god himself or mediated through his son asclepius.
apollo delivered people from epidemics, yet he is also a god who could bring ill-health and deadly plague with his arrows.
the invention of archery itself is credited to apollo and his sister artemis.
apollo is usually described as carrying a golden bow and a quiver of silver arrows.
apollo's capacity to make youths grow is one of the best attested facets of his panhellenic cult persona.
as the protector of young ("kourotrophos"), apollo is concerned with the health and education of children.
he presided over their passage into adulthood.
long hair, which was the prerogative of boys, was cut at the coming of age (ephebeia) and dedicated to apollo.
apollo is an important pastoral deity, and was the patron of herdsmen and shepherds.
protection of herds, flocks and crops from diseases, pests and predators were his primary duties.
on the other hand, apollo also encouraged founding new towns and establishment of civil constitution.
he is associated with dominion over colonists.
he was the giver of laws, and his oracles were consulted before setting laws in a city.
as the god of "mousike" (art of muses), apollo presides over all music, songs, dance and poetry.
he is the inventor of string-music, and the frequent companion of the muses, functioning as their chorus leader in celebrations.
the lyre is a common attribute of apollo.
in latin texts, however, there was no conflation of apollo with sol among the classical latin poets until 1st century ce.
apollo and helios/sol remained separate beings in literary and mythological texts until the 5th century ce.
the etymology of the name is uncertain.
apella () is the name of the popular assembly in sparta, corresponding to the "ecclesia" ().
r. s. p. beekes rejected the connection of the theonym with the noun "apellai" and suggested a pre-greek proto-form *"apalun".
several instances of popular etymology are attested from ancient authors.
thus, the greeks most often associated apollo's name with the greek verb ("apollymi"), "to destroy".
the hittite testimony reflects an early form "", which may also be surmised from comparison of cypriot with doric .
a luwian etymology suggested for "apaliunas" makes apollo "the one of entrapment", perhaps in the sense of "hunter".
apollo's chief epithet was phoebus ( ; , "phoibos" ), literally "bright".
it was very commonly used by both the greeks and romans for apollo's role as the god of light.
however, while apollo has a great number of appellations in greek myth, only a few occur in latin literature.
apollo's birthplace was mount cynthus on the island of delos.
delphi and actium were his primary places of worship.
apollo was worshipped throughout the roman empire.
in the traditionally celtic lands, he was most often seen as a healing and sun god.
he was often equated with celtic gods of similar character.
the cult centers of apollo in greece, delphi and delos, date from the 8th century bce.
the delos sanctuary was primarily dedicated to artemis, apollo's twin sister.
at delphi, apollo was venerated as the slayer of pytho.
for the greeks, apollo was all the gods in one and through the centuries he acquired different functions which could originate from different gods.
in archaic greece he was the prophet, the oracular god who in older times was connected with "healing".
in classical greece he was the god of light and of music, but in popular religion he had a strong function to keep away evil.
the inspiration oracular-cult was probably introduced from anatolia.
the ritualism belonged to apollo from the beginning.
the greeks created the legalism, the supervision of the orders of the gods, and the demand for moderation and harmony.
the improvement of the old anatolian god, and his elevation to an intellectual sphere, may be considered an achievement of the greek people.
paeοn is probably connected with the mycenaean "pa-ja-wo-ne" (linear b: ), but this is not certain.
he did not have a separate cult, but he was the personification of the holy magic-song sung by the magicians that was supposed to cure disease.
later the greeks knew the original meaning of the relevant song "paean" ().
he sends a plague () to the achaeans.
when the oath of his priest appeases, they pray and with a song they call their own god, the "paean".
in later writers, the word, usually spelled "paean", becomes a mere epithet of apollo in his capacity as a god of healing.
homer illustrated paeon the god and the song both of apotropaic thanksgiving or triumph.
such songs were originally addressed to apollo and afterwards to other gods: to dionysus, to apollo helios, to apollo's son asclepius the healer.
it was in this way that apollo had become recognized as the god of music.
the connection with the dorians and their initiation festival "apellai" is reinforced by the month "apellaios" in northwest greek calendars.
the family-festival was dedicated to apollo (doric: ).
"apellaios" is the month of these rites, and apellon is the "megistos kouros" (the great kouros).
stones played an important part in the cult of the god, especially in the oracular shrine of delphi (omphalos).
the "homeric hymn" represents apollo as a northern intruder.
the earth deity had power over the ghostly world and it is believed that she was the deity behind the oracle.
the older tales mentioned two dragons who were perhaps intentionally conflated.
a female dragon named delphyne (; cf.
apollo and his sister artemis can bring death with their arrows.
the conception that diseases and death come from invisible shots sent by supernatural beings, or magicians is common in germanic and norse mythology.
in greek mythology artemis was the leader (, "hegemon") of the nymphs, who had similar functions with the nordic elves.
the vedic rudra has some similar functions with apollo.
the terrible god is called "the archer" and the bow is also an attribute of shiva.
rudra could bring diseases with his arrows, but he was able to free people of them and his alternative shiva is a healer physician god.
however the indo-european component of apollo does not explain his strong relation with omens, exorcisms, and with the oracular cult.
it seems an oracular cult existed in delphi from the mycenaean age.
in historical times, the priests of delphi were called lab(r)yadai, "the double-axe men", which indicates minoan origin.
the double-axe, labrys, was the holy symbol of the cretan labyrinth.
the homeric hymn adds that apollo appeared as a dolphin and carried cretan priests to delphi, where they evidently transferred their religious practices.
"apollo delphinios" or "delphidios" was a sea-god especially worshiped in crete and in the islands.
in her earliest depictions she is accompanied by the "master of the animals", a male god of hunting who had the bow as his attribute.
this led some scholars to the conclusion that pythia carried on the rituals in a consistent procedure through many centuries, according to the local tradition.
in that regard, the mythical seeress sibyl of anatolian origin, with her ecstatic art, looks unrelated to the oracle itself.
however, the greek tradition is referring to the existence of vapours and chewing of laurel-leaves, which seem to be confirmed by recent studies.
frenzied women like sibyls from whose lips the god speaks are recorded in the near east as mari in the second millennium bc.
although crete had contacts with mari from 2000 bc, there is no evidence that the ecstatic prophetic art existed during the minoan and mycenean ages.
a non-greek origin of apollo has long been assumed in scholarship.
the name of apollo's mother leto has lydian origin, and she was worshipped on the coasts of asia minor.
the inspiration oracular cult was probably introduced into greece from anatolia, which is the origin of sibyl, and where existed some of the oldest oracular shrines.
omens, symbols, purifications, and exorcisms appear in old assyro-babylonian texts, and these rituals were spread into the empire of the hittites.
in a hittite text is mentioned that the king invited a babylonian priestess for a certain "purification".
a similar story is mentioned by plutarch.
it seems that these rituals were dormant in greece and they were reinforced when the greeks migrated to anatolia.
homer pictures apollo on the side of the trojans, fighting against the achaeans, during the trojan war.
he is pictured as a terrible god, less trusted by the greeks than other gods.
the stones found in front of the gates of homeric troy were the symbols of apollo.
however, recent scholars have cast doubt on the identification of "qλdãns" with apollo.
the late bronze age (from 1700 to 1200 bce) hittite and hurrian "aplu" was a god of plague, invoked during plague years.
here we have an apotropaic situation, where a god originally bringing the plague was invoked to end it.
all these functions, including the function of the healer-god paean, who seems to have mycenean origin, are fused in the cult of apollo.
unusually among the olympic deities, apollo had two cult sites that had widespread influence: delos and delphi.
in cult practice, delian apollo and pythian apollo (the apollo of delphi) were so distinct that they might both have shrines in the same locality.
lycia was sacred to the god, for this apollo was also called lycian.
apollo's cult was already fully established when written sources commenced, about 650 bce.
oracular sanctuaries to apollo were established in other sites.
"in the 3rd century, apollo fell silent.
julian the apostate (359–361) tried to revive the delphic oracle, but failed."
apollo had a famous oracle in delphi, and other notable ones in claros and didyma.
his oracular shrines include: oracles were also given by sons of apollo.
many temples were dedicated to apollo in greece and the greek colonies.
some of the earliest temples, especially in crete, do not belong to any greek order.
it seems that the first peripteral temples were rectangular wooden structures.
the different wooden elements were considered divine, and their forms were preserved in the marble or stone elements of the temples of doric order.
the greeks used standard types because they believed that the world of objects was a series of typical forms which could be represented in several instances.
the temples should be canonic, and the architects were trying to achieve this esthetic perfection.
from the earliest times there were certain rules strictly observed in rectangular peripteral and prostyle buildings.
this probably influenced the theory of numbers of pythagoras, who believed that behind the appearance of things there was the permanent principle of mathematics.
the order was almost abandoned for the ionic order, but the ionic capital also posed an insoluble problem at the corner of a temple.
both orders were abandoned for the corinthian order gradually during the hellenistic age and under rome.
the most important temples are: apollo appears often in the myths, plays and hymns.
as zeus' favorite son, apollo had direct access to the mind of zeus and was willing to reveal this knowledge to humans.
a divinity beyond human comprehension, he appears both as a beneficial and a wrathful god.
apollo was the son of zeus, the king of the gods, and leto, his previous wife or one of his mistresses.
growing up, apollo was nursed by the nymphs korythalia and aletheia, the personification of truth.
when zeus' wife hera discovered that leto was pregnant, she banned leto from giving birth on "terra firma".
leto sought shelter in many lands, only to be rejected by them.
finally, the voice of unborn apollo informed his mother about a floating island named delos which had once been asteria, leto's own sister.
since it was neither a mainland nor an island, leto was readily welcomed there and gave birth to her children under a palm tree.
all the goddesses except hera were present to witness the event.
it is also stated that hera kidnapped eileithyia, the goddess of childbirth, to prevent leto from going into labor.
the other gods tricked hera into letting her go by offering her a necklace of amber 9 yards or 8.2 meters long.
when apollo was born, clutching a golden sword, everything on delos turned into gold and the island was filled with ambrosial fragrance.
swans circled the island seven times and the nymphs sang in delight.
he was washed clean by the goddesses who then covered him in white garment and fastened golden bands around him.
since leto was unable to feed the him, themis, the goddess of divine law, fed him with nectar, or ambrosia.
zeus, who had calmed hera by the time, came and adorned his son with a golden headband.
apollo's birth fixed the floating delos to the earth.
leto promised that her son would be always favorable towards the delians.
according to some, apollo secured delos to the bottom of the ocean after some time.
this island became sacred to apollo and was one of the major cult centres of the god.
apollo was born on the seventh day (, "hebdomagenes") of the month thargelion —according to delian tradition—or of the month bysios—according to delphian tradition.
the seventh and twentieth, the days of the new and full moon, were ever afterwards held sacred to him.
hyperborea, the mystical land of eternal spring, venerated apollo above all the gods.
the hyperboreans always sang and danced in his honor and hosted pythian games.
there, a vast forest of beautiful trees was called "the garden of apollo".
apollo spent the winter months among the hyperboreans.
his absence from the world caused coldness and this was marked as his annual death.
no prophecies were issued during this time.
he returned to the world during the beginning of the spring.
the "theophania" festival was held in delphi to celebrate his return.
it is said that leto came to delos from hyperborea accompanied by a pack of wolves.
henceforth, hyperborea became apollo's winter home and wolves became sacred to him.
his intimate connection to wolves is evident from his epithet "lyceus", meaning "wolf-like".
but apollo was also the wolf-slayer in his role as the god who protected flocks from predators.
the hyperborean worship of apollo bears the strongest marks of apollo being worshipped as the sun god.
shamanistic elements in apollo's cult are often liked to his hyperborean origin, and he is likewise speculated to have originated as a solar shaman.
shamans like abaris and aristeas were also the followers of apollo, who hailed from hyperborea.
in myths, the tears of amber apollo shed when his son asclepius died became the waters of the river eridanos, which surrounded hyperborea.
apollo also buried in hyperborea the arrow which he had used to kill the cyclopes.
he later gave this arrow to abaris.
as a child, apollo is said to have built a foundation and an altar on delos using the horns of the goats that his sister artemis hunted.
from his father zeus, apollo had also received a golden chariot drawn by swans.
apollo is also said to have invented the lyre, and along with artemis, the art of archery.
he then taught to the humans the art of healing and archery.
phoebe, his grandmother, gave the oracular shrine of delphi to apollo as a birthday gift.
themis inspired him to be the oracular voice of delphi thereon.
python was the nurse of the giant typhon.
in most of the traditions, apollo was still a child when he killed python.
python was sent by hera to hunt the pregnant leto to death, and had assaulted her.
the delphian nymphs who were present encouraged apollo during the battle with the cry "hie paean".
after apollo was victorious, they also brought him gifts and gave the corycian cave to him.
according to homer, apollo had encountered and killed the python when he was looking for a place to establish his shrine.
according to another version, when leto was in delphi, python had attacked her.
apollo defended his mother and killed python.
euripides in his "iphigenia in aulis" gives an account of his fight with python and the events aftermath.
a detailed account of apollo's conflict with gaea and zeus' intervention on behalf of his young son is also given.
zeus smiled, that the child so quickly came to ask for worship that pays in gold.
apollo also demanded that all other methods of divination be made inferior to his, a wish that zeus granted him readily.
because of this, athena, who had been practicing divination by throwing pebbles, cast her pebbles away in displeasure.
however, apollo had committed a blood murder and had to be purified.
because python was a child of gaea, gaea wanted apollo to be banished to tartarus as a punishment.
zeus didn't agree and instead exiled his son from olympus, and instructed him to get purified.
apollo had to serve as a slave for nine years.
after the servitude was over, as per his father's order, he travelled to the vale of tempe to bath in waters of peneus.
there zeus himself performed purificatory rites on apollo.
purified, apollo was escorted by his half sister athena to delphi where the oracular shrine was finally handed over to him by gaea.
according to a variation, apollo had also travelled to crete, where carmanor purified him.
apollo later established the pythian games to appropriate gaea.
henceforth, apollo became the god who cleansed himself from the sin of murder and, made men aware of their guilt and purified them.
soon after, zeus instructed apollo to go to delphi and establish his law.
but apollo, disobeying his father, went to the land of hyperborea and stayed there for a year.
he returned only after the delphians sang hymns to him and pleaded him to come back.
zeus, pleased with his son's integrity, gave apollo the seat next to him on his right side.
he also gave to apollo various gifts, like a golden tripod, a golden bow and arrows, a golden chariot and the city of delphi.
soon after his return, apollo needed to recruit people to delphi.
so, when he spotted a ship sailing from crete, he sprang aboard in the form of a dolphin.
the crew was awed into submission and followed a course that led the ship to delphi.
there apollo revealed himself as a god.
initiating them to his service, he instructed them to keep righteousness in their hearts.
the pythia was apollo's high priestess and his mouthpiece through whom he gave prophecies.
pythia is arguably the constant favorite of apollo among the mortals.
hera once again sent another giant, tityos to rape leto.
this time apollo shot him with his arrows and attacked him with his golden sword.
according to other version, artemis also aided him in protecting their mother by attacking tityos with her arrows.
after the battle zeus finally relented his aid and hurled tityos down to tartarus.
there, he was pegged to the rock floor, covering an area of , where a pair of vultures feasted daily on his liver.
admetus was the king of pherae, who was known for his hospitality.
when apollo was exiled from olympus for killing python, he served as a herdsman under admetus, who was then young and unmarried.
apollo is said to have shared a romantic relationship with admetus during his stay.
after completing his years of servitude, apollo went back to olympus as a god.
because admetus had treated apollo well, the god conferred great benefits on him in return.
apollo's mere presence is said to have made the cattle give birth to twins.
apollo helped admetus win the hand of alcestis, the daughter of king pelias, by taming a lion and a boar to draw admetus' chariot.
he was present during their wedding to give his blessings.
when admetus angered the goddess artemis by forgetting to give her the due offerings, apollo came to the rescue and calmed his sister.
when apollo learnt of admetus' untimely death, he convinced or tricked the fates into letting admetus live past his time.
zeus obliged and sentenced apollo to one year of hard labor once again under admetus.
the love between apollo and admetus was a favored topic of roman poets like ovid and servius.
the fate of niobe was prophesied by apollo while he was still in leto's womb.
niobe was the queen of thebes and wife of amphion.
she further mocked apollo's effeminate appearance and artemis' manly appearance.
leto, insulted by this, told her children to punish niobe.
accordingly, apollo killed niobe's sons, and artemis her daughters.
according to some versions of the myth, among the niobids, chloris and her brother amyclas were not killed because they prayed to leto.
amphion, at the sight of his dead sons, either killed himself or was killed by apollo after swearing revenge.
a devastated niobe fled to mount sipylos in asia minor and turned into stone as she wept.
her tears formed the river achelous.
when chloris married and had children, apollo granted her son nestor the years he had taken away from the niobids.
hence, nestor was able to live for 3 generations.
once apollo and poseidon served under the trojan king laomedon in accordance to zeus' words.
apollodorus states that the gods willingly went to the king disguised as humans in order to check his hubris.
apollo guarded the cattle of laomedon in the valleys of mount ida, while poseidon built the walls of troy.
other versions make both apollo and poseidon the builders of the wall.
in ovid's account, apollo completes his task by playing his tunes on his lyre.
in pindar's odes, the gods took a mortal named aeacus as their assistant.
apollo immediately prophesied that troy would fall at the hands of aeacus's descendants, the aeacidae (i.e.
his son telamon joined heracles when he sieged the city during laomedon's rule.
later, his great grandson neoptolemus was present in the wooden horse that lead to the downfall of troy).
angered by the unpaid labour and the insults, apollo infected the city with a pestilence and posedion sent the sea monster cetus.
to deliver the city from it, laomedon had to sacrifice his daughter hesione (who would later be saved by heracles).
during his stay in troy, apollo had a lover named ourea, who was a nymph and daughter of poseidon.
together they had a son named ileus, whom apollo loved dearly.
apollo sided with the trojans during the trojan war waged by the greeks against the trojans.
during the war, the greek king agamemnon captured chryseis, the daughter of apollo's priest chryses, and refused to return her.
angered by this, apollo shot arrows infected with the plague into the greek encampment.
receiving the aegis from zeus, apollo entered the battlefield as per his father's command, causing great terror to the enemy with his war cry.
he pushed the greeks back and destroyed many of the soldiers.
he is described as "the rouser of armies" because he rallied the trojan army when they were falling apart.
when zeus allowed the other gods to get involved in the war, apollo was provoked by poseidon to a duel.
however, apollo declined to fight him, saying that he wouldn't fight his uncle for the sake of mortals.
when the greek hero diomedes injured the trojan hero aeneas, aphrodite tried to rescue him, but diomedes injured her as well.
apollo then enveloped aeneas in a cloud to protect him.
he repelled the attacks diomedes made on him and gave the hero a stern warning to abstain himself from attacking a god.
aeneas was then taken to pergamos, a sacred spot in troy, where he was healed.
after the death of sarpedon, a son of zeus, apollo rescued the corpse from the battlefield as per his father's wish and cleaned it.
he then gave it to sleep (hypnos) and death (thanatos).
apollo had also once convinced athena to stop the war for that day, so that the warriors can relieve themselves for a while.
the trojan hero hector (who, according to some, was the god's own son by hecuba) was favored by apollo.
when he got severely injured, apollo healed him and encouraged him to take up his arms.
during a duel with achilles, when hector was about to lose, apollo hid hector in a cloud of mist to save him.
when the greek warrior patroclus tried to get into the fort of troy, he was stopped by apollo.
encouraging hector to attack patroclus, apollo stripped the armour of the greek warrior and broke his weapons.
patroclus was eventually killed by hector.
at last, after hector's fated death, apollo protected his corpse from achilles' attempt to mutilate it by creating a magical cloud over the corpse.
not only did apollo save hector from achilles, he also tricked achilles by disguising himself as a trojan warrior and driving him away from the gates.
he foiled achilles' attempt to mutilate hector's dead body.
finally, apollo caused achilles' death by guiding an arrow shot by paris into achilles' heel.
in some versions, apollo himself killed achilles by taking the disguise of paris.
apollo helped many trojan warriors, including agenor, polydamas, glaucus in the battlefield.
though he greatly favored the trojans, apollo was bound to follow the orders of zeus and served his father loyally during the war.
after heracles (then named alcides) was struck with madness and killed his family, he sought to purify himself and consulted the oracle of apollo.
apollo, through the pythia, commanded him to serve king eurystheus for twelve years and complete the ten tasks the king would give him.
only then would alcides be absolved of his sin.
apollo also renamed him as heracles.
to complete his third task, heracles had to capture the ceryneian hind, a hind sacred to artemis, and bring it alive.
he chased the hind for one year.
when the animal eventually got tired and tried crossing the river ladon, he captured it.
while he was taking it back, he was confronted by apollo and artemis, who were angered at heracles for this act.
however, heracles soothed the goddess and explained his situation to her.
after much pleading, artemis permitted him to take the hind and told him to return it later.
after he was freed from his servitude to eurystheus, heracles fell in conflict with iphytus, a prince of oechalia, and murdered him.
soon after, he contracted a terrible disease.
he consulted the oracle of apollo once again, in hope of ridding himself of the disease.
the pythia, however, denied to give any prophesy.
in anger, heracles snatched the sacred tripod and started walking away, intending to start his own oracle.
however, apollo did not tolerate this and stopped heracles; a duel ensued between them.
artemis rushed to support apollo, while athena supported heracles.
soon, zeus threw his thunderbolt between the fighting brothers and separated them.
he reprimanded heracles for this act of violation and asked apollo to give a solution to heracles.
apollo then ordered the hero to serve under omphale, queen of lydia for one year in order to purify himself.
periphas was an attican king and a priest of apollo.
he was noble, just and rich.
he did all his duties justly.
because of this people were very fond of him and started honouring him to the same extent as zeus.
at one point, they worshipped periphas in place of zeus and set up shrines and temples for him.
this annoyed zeus, who decided to annihilate the entire family of periphas.
but because he was a just king and a good devotee, apollo intervened and requested his father to spare periphas.
zeus considered apollo's words and agreed to let him live.
but he metamorphosed periphas into an eagle and made the eagle the king of birds.
when periphas' wife requested zeus to let her stay with her husband, zeus turned her into a vulture and fulfilled her wish.
they were powerful and unruly.
otis and ephialtes even dared to scale mount olympus.
to check their insolence, zeus devised a plan to humble them and improve their manners instead of completely destroying them.
he cut them all in two and asked apollo to make necessary repairs, giving humans the individual shape they still have now.
this is what we call navel today.
he smoothened the wrinkles and shaped the chest.
but he made sure to leave a few wrinkles on the abdomen and around the navel so that they might be reminded of their punishment.
apollo "kourotrophos" is the god who nurtures and protects children and the young, especially boys.
he oversees their education and their passage into adulthood.
education is said to have originated from apollo and the muses.
many myths have him train his children.
it was a custom for boys to cut and dedicate their long hair to apollo after reaching adulthood.
chiron, the abandoned centaur, was fostered by apollo, who instructed him in medicine, prophecy, archery and more.
chiron would later become a great teacher himself.
asclepius in his childhood gained much knowledge pertaining to medicinal arts by his father.
however, he was later entrusted to chiron for further education.
anius, apollo's son by rhoeo, was abandoned by his mother soon after his birth.
apollo brought him up and educated him in mantic arts.
anius later became the priest of apollo and the king of delos.
iamus was the son of apollo and evadne.
when evadne went into labour, apollo sent the moirai to assist his lover.
after the child was born, apollo sent snakes to feed the child some honey.
idmon was educated by apollo to be a seer.
even though he foresaw his death that would happen in his journey with the argonauts, he embraced his destiny and died a brave death.
to commemorate his son's bravery, apollo commanded boetians to build a town around the tomb of the hero, and to honor him.
apollo adopted carnus, the abandoned son of zeus and europa.
he reared the child with the help of his mother leto and educated him to be a seer.
apollo saved a shepherd boy (name unknown) from death in a large deep cave, by the means of vultures.
to thank him, the shepherd built apollo a temple under the name vulturius.
immediately after his birth, apollo demanded a lyre and invented the paean, thus becoming the god of music.
as the divine singer, he is the patron of poets, singers and musicians.
the invention of string music is attributed to him.
plato said that the innate ability of humans to take delight in music, rhythm and harmony is the gift of apollo and the muses.
for this reason, he was called "homopolon" before the "homo" was replaced by "a".
apollo's harmonious music delivered people from their pain, and hence, like dionysus, he is also called the liberator.
the swans, which were considered to be the most musical among the birds, were believed to be the "singers of apollo".
they are apollo's sacred birds and acted as his vehicle during his travel to hyperborea.
aelian says that when the singers would sing hymns to apollo, the swans would join the chant in unison.
among the pythagoreans, the study of mathematics and music were connected to the worship of apollo, their principal deity.
their belief was that the music purifies the soul, just as medicine purifies the body.
apollo appears as the companion of the muses, and as musagetes ("leader of muses") he leads them in dance.
they spend their time on parnassus, which is one of their sacred places.
apollo is also the lover of the muses and by them he became the father of famous musicians like orpheus and linus.
apollo is often found delighting the immortal gods with his songs and music on the lyre.
he is a frequent guest of the bacchanalia, and many ancient ceramics depict him being at ease amidst the maenads and satyrs.
apollo also participated in musical contests when challenged by others.
he was the victor in all those contests, but he tended to punish his opponents severely for their hubris.
the invention of lyre is attributed either to hermes or to apollo himself.
distinctions have been made that hermes invented lyre made of tortoise shell, whereas the lyre apollo invented was a regular lyre.
myths tell that the infant hermes stole a number of apollo's cows and took them to a cave in the woods near pylos, covering their tracks.
in the cave, he found a tortoise and killed it, then removed the insides.
he used one of the cow's intestines and the tortoise shell and made his lyre.
upon discovering the theft, apollo confronted hermes and asked him to return his cattle.
when hermes acted innocent, apollo took the matter to zeus.
zeus, having seen the events, sided with apollo, and ordered hermes to return the cattle.
hermes then began to play music on the lyre he had invented.
apollo fell in love with the instrument and offered to exchange the cattle for the lyre.
hence, apollo then became the master of the lyre.
according to other versions, apollo had invented the lyre himself, whose strings he tore in repenting of the excess punishment he had given to marsyas.
hermes' lyre, therefore, would be a reinvention.
once pan had the audacity to compare his music with that of apollo and to challenge the god of music to a contest.
the mountain-god tmolus was chosen to umpire.
pan blew on his pipes, and with his rustic melody gave great satisfaction to himself and his faithful follower, midas, who happened to be present.
then, apollo struck the strings of his lyre.
it was so beautiful that tmolus at once awarded the victory to apollo, and everyone was pleased with the judgement.
only midas dissented and questioned the justice of the award.
apollo did not want to suffer such a depraved pair of ears any longer, and caused them to become the ears of a donkey.
marsyas was a satyr who was punished by apollo for his hubris.
he had found an aulos on the ground, tossed away after being invented by athena because it made her cheeks puffy.
athena had also placed a curse upon the instrument, that whoever would pick it up would be severely punished.
when marsyas played the flute, everyone became frenzied with joy.
this led marsyas to think that he was better than apollo, and he challenged the god to a musical contest.
the contest was judged by the muses, or the nymphs of nysa.
athena was also present to witness the contest.
marsyas taunted apollo for "wearing his hair long, for having a fair face and smooth body, for his skill in so many arts".
he also further said, 'his [apollo] hair is smooth and made into tufts and curls that fall about his brow and hang before his face.
what of his robes so fine in texture, so soft to the touch, aglow with purple?
what of his lyre that flashes gold, gleams white with ivory, and shimmers with rainbow gems?
what of his song, so cunning and so sweet?
nay, all these allurements suit with naught save luxury.
to virtue they bring shame alone!'
the muses and athena sniggered at this comment.
the contestants agreed to take turns displaying their skills and the rule was that the victor could "do whatever he wanted" to the loser.
according to one account, after the first round, they both were deemed equal by the nysiads.
but in the next round, apollo decided to play on his lyre and add his melodious voice to his performance.
marsyas argued against this, saying that apollo would have an advantage and accused apollo of cheating.
the nymphs decided that apollo's argument was just.
apollo then played his lyre and sang at the same time, mesmerising the audience.
marsyas could not do this.
apollo was declared the winner and, angered with marsyas' haughtiness and his accusations, decided to flay the satyr.
according to another account, marsyas played his flute out of tune at one point and accepted his defeat.
out of shame, he assigned to himself the punishment of being skinned for a wine sack.
another variation is that apollo played his instrument upside down.
marsyas could not do this with his instrument.
so the muses who were the judges declared apollo the winner.
apollo hung marsyas from a tree to flay him.
apollo flayed the limbs of marsyas alive in a cave near celaenae in phrygia for his hubris to challenge a god.
he then gave the rest of his body for proper burial and nailed marsyas' flayed skin to a nearby pine-tree as a lesson to the others.
marsyas' blood turned into the river marsyas.
but apollo soon repented and being distressed at what he had done, he tore the strings of his lyre and threw it away.
the lyre was later discovered by the muses and apollo's sons linus and orpheus.
the muses fixed the middle string, linus the string struck with the forefinger, and orpheus the lowest string and the one next to it.
cinyras was a ruler of cyprus, who was a friend of agamemnon.
cinyras promised to assist agamemnon in the trojan war, but did not keep his promise.
agamemnon cursed cinyras.
he invoked apollo and asked the god to avenge the broken promise.
apollo then had a lyre-playing contest with cinyras, and defeated him.
either cinyras committed suicide when he lost, or was killed by apollo.
apollo functions as the patron and protector of sailors, one of the duties he shares with poseidon.
in the myths, he is seen helping heroes who pray to him for safe journey.
when the argonauts faced a terrible storm, jason prayed to his patron, apollo, to help them.
apollo used his bow and golden arrow to shed light upon an island, where the argonauts soon took shelter.
this island was renamed "anaphe", which means "he revealed it".
apollo helped the greek hero diomedes, to escape from a great tempest during his journey homeward.
as a token of gratitude, diomedes built a temple in honor of apollo under the epithet epibaterius ("the embarker").
pleased with this, apollo sent gentle breezes that helped odysseus return safely to the greek camp.
arion was a poet who was kidnapped by some sailors for the rich prizes he possessed.
arion requested them to let him sing for the last time, to which the sailors consented.
arion began singing a song in praise of apollo, seeking the god's help.
consequently, numerous dolphins surrounded the ship and when arion jumped into the water, the dolphins carried him away safely.
once hera, out of spite, aroused the titans to war against zeus and take away his throne.
apollo played a pivotal role in the entire trojan war.
he sided with the trojans, and sent a terrible plague to the greek camp, which indirectly led to the conflict between achilles and agamemnon.
he killed the greek heroes patroclus, achilles, and numerous greek soldiers.
he also helped many trojan heroes, the most important one being hector.
after the end of the war, apollo and poseidon together cleaned the remains of the city and the camps.
a war broke out between the brygoi and the thesprotians, who had the support of odysseus.
the gods athena and ares came to the battlefield and took sides.
athena helped the hero odysseus while ares fought alongside of the brygoi.
when odysseus lost, athena and ares came into a direct duel.
to stop the battling gods and the terror created by their battle, apollo intervened and stopped the duel between them .
among the warriors was aristaeus, apollo's son.
apollo armed his son with his own hands and gave him a bow and arrows and fitted a strong shield to his arm.
after zeus urged apollo to join the war, he went to the battlefield.
seeing several of his nymphs and aristaeus drowning in a river, he took them to safety and healed them.
he taught aristaeus more useful healing arts and sent him back to help the army of dionysus.
during the war between the sons of oedipus, apollo favored amphiaraus, a seer and one of the leaders in the war.
when hypseus tried to kill the hero by a spear, apollo directed the spear towards the charioteer of amphiaraus instead.
then apollo himself replaced the charioteer and took the reins in his hands.
he deflected many spears and arrows away them.
he also killed many of the enemy warriors like melaneus, antiphus, aetion, polites and lampus.
apollo killed the giants python and tityos, who had assaulted his mother leto.
during the gigantomachy, apollo killed the giant ephialtes by shooting him in his eyes.
he also killed porphyrion, the king of giants, using his bow and arrows.
otis and ephialtes, the twin giants were together called the aloadae.
these giants are said to have grown every year by one cubit in breadth and three cubits in height.
they once threatened to wage a war on gods and attempted to storm mt.
olympus by piling up mountains.
they also threatened to change land into sea and sea into land.
some say they even dared to seek the hand of hera and artemis in marriage.
angered by this, apollo killed them by shooting arrows at them.
according to another tale, apollo killed them with a trick.
he sent a deer between them.
as they tried to kill it with their javelins, they accidentally stabbed each other and died.
phorbas was a savage giant king of phlegyas who was described as having swine like features.
he wished to plunder delphi for its wealth.
he seized the roads to delphi and started harassing the pilgrims.
he captured the old people and children and sent them to his army to hold them for ransom.
and he challenged the young and sturdy men to a match of boxing, only to cut their heads off when they would get defeated by him.
he hung the chopped off heads to an oak tree.
finally, apollo came to put an end to this cruelty.
he entered a boxing contest with phorbas and killed him with a single blow.
in the first olympic games, apollo defeated ares and became the victor in wrestling.
he outran hermes in the race and won first place.
apollo divides months into summer and winter.
during his absence, delphi was under the care of dionysus, and no prophecies were given during winters.
molpadia and parthenos were the sisters of rhoeo, a former lover of apollo.
one day, they were put in charge of watching their father's ancestral wine jar but they fell asleep while performing this duty.
while they were asleep, the wine jar was broken by the swines their family kept.
when the sisters woke up and saw what had happened, they threw themselves off a cliff in fear of their father's wrath.
apollo, who was passing by, caught them and carried them to two different cities in chersonesus, molpadia to castabus and parthenos to bubastus.
he turned them into goddesses and they both received divine honors.
molpadia's name was changed to hemithea upon her deification.
prometheus was the titan who was punished by zeus for stealing fire.
seeing his plight, apollo pleaded zeus to release the kind titan, while artemis and leto stood behind him with tears in their eyes.
zeus, moved by apollo's words and the tears of the goddesses, finally sent heracles to free prometheus.
leukatas was believed to be a white colored rock jutting out from the island of leukas into the sea.
it was present in the sanctuary of apollo leukates.
a leap from this rock was believed to have put an end to the longings of love.
once, aphrodite fell deeply in love with adonis, a young man of great beauty who was later accidentally killed by a boar.
heartbroken, aphrodite wandered looking for the rock of leukas.
when she reached the sanctuary of apollo in argos, she confided in him her love and sorrow.
apollo then brought her to the rock of leukas and asked her to throw herself from the top of the rock.
she did so and was freed from her love.
after jumping, he fell into the net of a fisherman in which, when he was pulled out, he found a box filled with gold.
this was the same rock from which, according to a legend, sappho took her suicidal leap.
love affairs ascribed to apollo are a late development in greek mythology.
daphne was a nymph whose parentage varies.
she scorned apollo's advances and ran away from him.
when apollo chased her in order to persuade her, she changed herself into a laurel tree.
the myth explains the origin of the laurel and connection of apollo with the laurel and its leaves, which his priestess employed at delphi.
the leaves became the symbol of victory and laurel wreaths were given to the victors of the pythian games.
apollo is said to have been the lover of all nine muses, and not being able to choose one of them, decided to remain unwed.
cyrene, was a thessalian princess whom apollo loved.
in her honor, he built the city cyrene and made her its ruler.
she was later granted longevity by apollo who turned her into a nymph.
the couple had two sons, aristaeus, and idmon.
evadne was a nymph daughter of poseidon and a lover of apollo.
she bore him a son, iamos.
during the time of the childbirth, apollo sent eileithyia, the goddess of childbirth to assist her.
rhoeo, a princess of the island of naxos was loved by apollo.
out of affection for her, apollo turned her sisters into goddesses.
on the island delos she bore apollo a son named anius.
not wanting to have the child, she entrusted the infant to apollo and left.
apollo raised and educated the child on his own.
ourea, a daughter of poseidon, fell in love with apollo when he and poseidon were serving the trojan king laomedon.
they both united on the day the walls of troy were built.
she bore to apollo a son, whom apollo named ileus, after the city of his birth, ilion (troy).
ileus was very dear to apollo.
thero, daughter of phylas, a maiden as beautiful as the moonbeams, was loved by the radiant apollo, and she loved him in return.
by their union, she became mother of chaeron, who was famed as "the tamer of horses".
he later built the city chaeronea.
hyrie or thyrie was the mother of cycnus.
apollo turned both the mother and son into swans when they jumped into a lake and tried to kill themselves.
hecuba was the wife of king priam of troy, and apollo had a son with her named troilus.
an oracle prophesied that troy would not be defeated as long as troilus reached the age of twenty alive.
he was ambushed and killed by achilleus, and apollo avenged his death by killing achilles.
after the sack of troy, hecuba was taken to lycia by apollo.
coronis, was daughter of phlegyas, king of the lapiths.
while pregnant with asclepius, coronis fell in love with ischys, son of elatus and slept with him.
when apollo found out about her infidelity through his prophetic powers, he sent his sister, artemis, to kill coronis.
apollo rescued the baby by cutting open koronis' belly and gave it to the centaur chiron to raise.
in euripides' play "ion", apollo fathered ion by creusa, wife of xuthus.
he used his powers to conceal her pregnancy from her father.
hyacinth or hyacinthus was one of apollo's favorite lovers.
he was a spartan prince, beautiful and athletic.
apollo is said to be filled with grief.
he was later resurrected and taken to heaven.
the festival hyacinthia was a national celebration of sparta, which commemorated the death and rebirth of hyacinthus.
another male lover was cyparissus, a descendant of heracles.
apollo gave him a tame deer as a companion but cyparissus accidentally killed it with a javelin as it lay asleep in the undergrowth.
cyparissus was so saddened by its death that he asked apollo to let his tears fall forever.
admetus, the king of pherae, was also apollo's lover.
during his exile, which lasted either for one year or nine years, apollo served admetus as a herdsman.
the romantic nature of their relationship was first described by callimachus of alexandria, who wrote that apollo was "fired with love" for admetus.
plutarch lists admetus as one of apollo's lovers and says that apollo served admetus because he doted upon him.
he would also make cheese and serve it to admetus.
his domestic actions caused embarrassment to his family.
when admetus wanted to marry princess alcestis, apollo provided a chariot pulled by a lion and a boar he had tamed.
this satisfied alcestis' father and he let admetus marry his daughter.
further, apollo saved the king from artemis' wrath and also convinced the moirai to postpone admetus' death once.
branchus, a shepherd, one day came across apollo in the woods.
captivated by the god's beauty, he kissed apollo.
apollo requited his affections and wanting to reward him, bestowed prophetic skills on him.
his descendants, the branchides, were an influential clan of prophets.
other male lovers of apollo include: apollo sired many children, from mortal women and nymphs as well as the goddesses.
his children grew up to be physicians, musicians, poets, seers or archers.
many of his sons founded new cities and became kings.
they were all usually very beautiful.
asclepius is the most famous son of apollo.
his skills as a physician surpassed that of apollo's.
zeus killed him for bringing back the dead, but upon apollo's request, he was resurrected as a god.
aristaeus was placed under the care of chiron after his birth.
he became the god of beekeeping, cheese making, animal husbandry and more.
he was ultimately given immortality for the benefits he bestowed upon the humanity.
the corybantes were spear-clashing, dancing demigods.
apollo's children who became musicians and bards include orpheus, linus, ialemus, hymenaeus, philammon, eumolpus and eleuther.
apollo fathered 3 daughters, apollonis, borysthenis and cephisso, who formed a group of minor muses, the "musa apollonides".
they were nicknamed nete, mese and hypate after the highest, middle and lowest strings of his lyre.
phemonoe was a seer and a poetess who was the inventor of hexameter.
apis, idmon, iamus, tenerus, mopsus, galeus, telmessus and others were gifted seers.
anius, pythaeus and ismenus lived as high priests.
most of them were trained by apollo himself.
he also had a son named chrysorrhoas who was a mechanic artist.
apollo turned parthenos into a constellation after her early death.
additionally, apollo fostered and educated chiron, the centaur who later became the greatest teacher and educated many demigods, including apollo's sons.
apollo also fostered carnus, the son of zeus and europa.
marpessa was kidnapped by idas but was loved by apollo as well.
zeus made her choose between them, and she chose idas on the grounds that apollo, being immortal, would tire of her when she grew old.
sinope, a nymph, was approached by the amorous apollo.
she made him promise that he would grant to her whatever she would ask for, and then cleverly asked him to let her stay a virgin.
apollo kept his promise and went back.
bolina was admired by apollo but she refused him and jumped into the sea.
to avoid her death, apollo turned her into a nymph and let her go.
castalia was a nymph whom apollo loved.
she fled from him and dove into the spring at delphi, at the base of mt.
parnassos, which was then named after her.
water from this spring was sacred; it was used to clean the delphian temples and inspire the priestesses.
cassandra, was a daughter of hecuba and priam.
apollo wished to court her.
cassandra promised to return his love on one condition - he should give her the power to see the future.
apollo fulfilled her wish, but she went back on her word and rejected him soon after.
angered that she broke her promise, apollo cursed her that even though she would see the future, no one would ever believe her prophecies.
hestia, the goddess of the hearth, rejected both apollo's and poseidon's marriage proposals and swore that she would always stay unmarried.
however, this relationship was never sexual but spiritual, which is why they both are seen being unmarried in the hellenic period.
artemis, like her brother, is armed with a bow and arrows.
she is the cause of sudden deaths of women.
she also is the protector of the young, especially girls.
though she has nothing to do with oracles, music or poetry, she sometimes led the female chorus on olympus while apollo sang.
the laurel ("daphne") was sacred to both.
"artemis daphnaia" had her temple among the lacedemonians, at a place called hypsoi.
"apollo daphnephoros" had a temple in eretria, a "place where the citizens are to take the oaths".
in later times when apollo was regarded as identical with the sun or helios, artemis was naturally regarded as selene or the moon.
hecate, the goddess of witchcraft and magic, is the chthonic counterpart of apollo.
they both are cousins, since their mothers - leto and asteria - are sisters.
one of apollo's epithets, "hecatos", is the masculine form of hecate, and both the names mean "working from afar".
while apollo presided over the prophetic powers and magic of light and heaven, hecate presided over the prophetic powers and magic of night and chthonian darkness.
if hecate is the "gate-keeper", apollo "agyieus" is the "door-keeper".
hecate is the goddess of crossroads and apollo is the god and protector of streets.
the oldest evidence found for hecate's worship is at apollo's temple in miletos.
there, hecate was taken to be apollo's sister counterpart in the absence of artemis.
hecate's lunar nature makes her the goddess of the waning moon and contrasts and complements, at the same time, apollo's solar nature.
as a deity of knowledge and great power, apollo was seen being the male counterpart of athena.
being zeus' favorite children, they were given more powers and duties.
apollo and athena often took up the role as protectors of cities, and were patrons of some of the important cities.
athena was the principle goddess of athens, apollo was the principle god of sparta.
as patrons of arts, apollo and athena were companions of the muses, the former a much more frequent companion than the latter.
apollo was sometimes called the son of athena and hephaestus due to his wise and artistic nature.
in the trojan war, as zeus' executive, apollo is seen holding the aegis like athena usually does.
apollo's decisions were usually approved by his sister athena, and they both worked to establish the law and order set forth by zeus.
apollo gives an order through the oracle at delphi that agamemnon's son, orestes, is to kill clytemnestra and aegisthus, her lover.
orestes and pylades carry out the revenge, and consequently orestes is pursued by the erinyes or furies (female personifications of vengeance).
they invade his temple, and he drives them away.
he says that the matter should be brought before athena.
apollo promises to protect orestes, as orestes has become apollo's supplicant.
apollo advocates orestes at the trial, and ultimately athena rules in favor of apollo.
the roman worship of apollo was adopted from the greeks.
as a quintessentially greek god, apollo had no direct roman equivalent, although later roman poets often referred to him as phoebus.
there was a tradition that the delphic oracle was consulted as early as the period of the kings of rome during the reign of tarquinius superbus.
he also erected a new temple to the god on the palatine hill.
the chief apollonian festival was the pythian games held every four years at delphi and was one of the four great panhellenic games.
also of major importance was the delia held every four years on delos.
athenian annual festivals included the boedromia, metageitnia, pyanepsia, and thargelia.
spartan annual festivals were the carneia and the hyacinthia.
thebes every nine years held the daphnephoria.
apollo's most common attributes were the bow and arrow.
other attributes of his included the kithara (an advanced version of the common lyre), the plectrum and the sword.
another common emblem was the sacrificial tripod, representing his prophetic powers.
the pythian games were held in apollo's honor every four years at delphi.
the bay laurel plant was used in expiatory sacrifices and in making the crown of victory at these games.
the palm tree was also sacred to apollo because he had been born under one in delos.
homer and porphyry, wrote that apollo had a hawk as his messenger.
in many myths apollo is transformed into a hawk.
claudius aelianus wrote that egyptians called apollo horus in their own language.
as god of colonization, apollo gave oracular guidance on colonies, especially during the height of colonization, 750–550 bce.
according to greek tradition, he helped cretan or arcadian colonists found the city of troy.
in literary contexts, apollo represents harmony, order, and reason—characteristics contrasted with those of dionysus, god of wine, who represents ecstasy and disorder.
the contrast between the roles of these gods is reflected in the adjectives apollonian and dionysian.
this contrast appears to be shown on the two sides of the borghese vase.
apollo is often associated with the golden mean.
this is the greek ideal of moderation and a virtue that opposes gluttony.
apollo is a common theme in greek and roman art and also in the art of the renaissance.
greek art puts into apollo the highest degree of power and beauty that can be imagined.
the sculptors derived this from observations on human beings, but they also embodied in concrete form, issues beyond the reach of ordinary thought.
the naked bodies of the statues are associated with the cult of the body that was essentially a religious activity.
the muscular frames and limbs combined with slim waists indicate the greek desire for health, and the physical capacity which was necessary in the hard greek environment.
the statues of apollo embody beauty, balance and inspire awe before the beauty of the world.
finally praxiteles seems to be released from any art and religious conformities, and his masterpieces are a mixture of naturalism with stylization.
thales searched for a simple material-form directly perceptible by the senses, behind the appearances of things, and his theory is also related to the older animism.
this was paralleled in sculpture by the absolute representation of vigorous life, through unnaturally simplified forms.
pythagoras believed that behind the appearance of things, there was the permanent principle of mathematics, and that the forms were based on a transcendental mathematical relation.
the forms on earth, are imperfect imitations (, "eikones", "images") of the celestial world of numbers.
his ideas had a great influence on post-archaic art.
the greek architects and sculptors were always trying to find the mathematical relation, that would lead to the esthetic perfection.
(canon).
the forms on earth are imperfect duplicates of the intellectual celestial ideas.
indicating how the greek mind moved from the gift of the senses, to the principles beyond the senses.
the artists in plato's time moved away from his theories and art tends to be a mixture of naturalism with stylization.
the greek sculptors considered the senses more important, and the proportions were used to unite the sensible with the intellectual.
kouros ("male youth") is the modern term given to those representations of standing male youths which first appear in the archaic period in greece.
this type served certain religious needs and was first proposed for what was previously thought to be depictions of "apollo".
the first statues are certainly still and formal.
the formality of their stance seems to be related with the egyptian precedent, but it was accepted for a good reason.
when they tried to depict the most abiding qualities of men, it was because men had common roots with the unchanging gods.
these forms expressed immortality.
apollo was the immortal god of "ideal balance and order".
the greeks maintained, until late in their civilization, an almost animistic idea that the statues are in some sense alive.
this embodies the belief that the image was somehow the god or man himself.
a fine example is the statue of the "sacred gate kouros" which was found at the cemetery of dipylon in athens (dipylon kouros).
the statue is the "thing in itself", and his slender face with the deep eyes express an intellectual eternity.
this kind of art goes back to the minoan period, when its main theme was the representation of motion in a specific moment.
these free-standing statues were usually marble, but also the form rendered in limestone, bronze, ivory and terracotta.
the earliest examples of life-sized statues of apollo, may be two figures from the ionic sanctuary on the island of delos.
ranking from the very few bronzes survived to us is the masterpiece bronze piraeus apollo.
it was found in piraeus, the harbour of athens.
the statue originally held the bow in its left hand, and a cup of pouring libation in its right hand.
it probably comes from north-eastern peloponnesus.
the statue throws some light on an artistic centre which, with an independently developed harder, simpler and heavier style, restricts ionian influence in athens.
finally, this is the germ from which the art of polykleitos was to grow two or three generations later.
at the beginning of the classical period, it was considered that beauty in visible things as in everything else, consisted of symmetry and proportions.
the artists tried also to represent motion in a specific moment (myron), which may be considered as the reappearance of the dormant minoan element.
anatomy and geometry are fused in one, and each does something to the other.
the greek sculptors tried to clarify it by looking for mathematical proportions, just as they sought some reality behind appearances.
it seems that he was influenced by the theories of pythagoras.
though the proportions were always important in greek art, the appeal of the greek sculptures eludes any explanation by proportion alone.
spiritual life is incorporated in matter, when it is given artistic form.
things as we see them, and as they really are, are one, that each stresses the nature of the other in a single unity.
the pediment shows the story of heracles stealing apollo's tripod that was strongly associated with his oracular inspiration.
their two figures hold the centre.
in the pediment of the temple of zeus in olympia, the single figure of apollo is dominating the scene.
these representations rely on presenting scenes directly to the eye for their own visible sake.
they care for the schematic arrangements of bodies in space, but only as parts in a larger whole.
while each scene has its own character and completeness it must fit into the general sequence to which it belongs.
in these archaic pediments the sculptors use empty intervals, to suggest a passage to and from a busy battlefield.
the artists seem to have been dominated by geometrical pattern and order, and this was improved when classical art brought a greater freedom and economy.
the marble is a hellenistic or roman copy of a bronze original by the greek sculptor leochares, made between 350 and 325 bce.
another haloed apollo in mosaic, from hadrumentum, is in the museum at sousse.
some time after this mosaic was executed, the earliest depictions of christ would also be beardless and haloed.
apollo has often featured in postclassical art and literature.
in 1978, the canadian band rush released an album with songs "apollo: bringer of wisdom"/"dionysus: bringer of love".
friedrich nietzsche argued that a fusion of the two was most desirable.
carl jung's apollo archetype represents what he saw as the disposition in people to over-intellectualise and maintain emotional distance.
charles handy, in "gods of management" (1978) uses greek gods as a metaphor to portray various types of organisational culture.
apollo represents a 'role' culture where order, reason, and bureaucracy prevail.
in spaceflight, the 1960s and 1970s nasa program for orbiting and landing astronauts on the moon was named apollo.
andre kirk agassi ( ; born april 29, 1970) is an american retired professional tennis player and former world no.
he also won 17 atp masters series titles and was part of the winning davis cup teams in 1990, 1992 and 1995.
agassi reached the world no.
1 ranking for the first time in 1995 but was troubled by personal issues during the mid-to-late 1990s and sank to no.
141 in 1997, prompting many to believe that his career was over.
agassi returned to no.
1 in 1999 and enjoyed the most successful run of his career over the next four years.
during his 20-plus year tour career, agassi was known by the nickname "the punisher".
he is the founder of the andre agassi charitable foundation, which has raised over $60 million for at-risk children in southern nevada.
in 2001, the foundation opened the andre agassi college preparatory academy in las vegas, a k-12 public charter school for at-risk children.
he has been married to fellow tennis player steffi graf since 2001.
his father is of armenian and assyrian heritage.
andre agassi's mother, betty, is a breast cancer survivor.
he has three older siblings – rita (last wife to pancho gonzales), philip and tami.
andre was given the middle name kirk after kirk kerkorian, an armenian american billionaire.
agassi, a waiter at tropicana las vegas, met kerkorian in 1963.
agassi at the age of 12 (with his good friend and doubles partner roddy parks) won the 1982 national indoor boys 14s doubles championship in chicago.
agassi describes more of his memorable experiences and juvenile pranks with roddy in his book "open".
at the age of 13, agassi was sent to nick bollettieri's tennis academy in florida.
he was meant to stay for only three months, because that was all his father could afford.
after thirty minutes of watching agassi play, bollettieri, deeply impressed by his talent, called mike and said: "take your check back.
he's here for free."
agassi then dropped out of school in the ninth grade to pursue a full-time tennis career.
agassi turned professional at the age of 16 and competed in his first tournament at la quinta, california.
he won his first match against john austin, but then lost his second match to mats wilander.
by the end of 1986, agassi was ranked no.
he won his first top-level singles title in 1987 at the sul american open in itaparica and ended the year ranked no.
his year-end ranking was no.
3, behind second-ranked ivan lendl and top-ranked mats wilander.
both the association of tennis professionals and "tennis" magazine named agassi the most improved player of the year for 1988.
strong performances on the tour meant that agassi was quickly tipped as a future grand slam champion.
while still a teenager, he reached the semi-finals of both the french open and the us open in 1988 and made the us open semi-finals in 1989.
he began the 1990s with a series of near-misses.
he reached his second grand slam final of the year at the us open, defeating defending champion boris becker in the semi-finals.
agassi lost the us open final to sampras in three sets.
the rivalry between these two american players became the biggest one in tennis over the rest of the decade.
in 1991, agassi reached his second consecutive french open final, where he faced fellow bollettieri academy alumnus jim courier.
courier emerged the victor in a five-set final.
agassi decided to play at wimbledon in 1991, leading to weeks of speculation in the media about the clothes he would wear.
he eventually emerged for the first round in a completely white outfit.
he reached the quarterfinals on that occasion, losing in five sets to david wheaton.
agassi's grand slam tournament breakthrough came at wimbledon, not at the french open or the us open, where he had previously enjoyed success.
in 1992, he defeated goran ivanišević in a five-set final.
along the way, agassi overcame two former wimbledon champions: boris becker and john mcenroe.
no other baseliner would triumph at wimbledon until lleyton hewitt ten years later.
agassi was named the bbc overseas sports personality of the year in 1992.
agassi once again played on the united states' davis cup winning team in 1992.
it was their second davis cup title in three years.
in 1993, agassi won the only doubles title of his career, at the cincinnati masters, partnered with petr korda.
he missed much of the early part of that year due to injuries.
although he made the quarterfinals in his wimbledon title defense, he lost to eventual champion and no.
1 pete sampras in five sets.
agassi lost in the first round at the us open to thomas enqvist and required wrist surgery late in the year.
with new coach brad gilbert on board, agassi began to employ more of a tactical, consistent approach, which fueled his resurgence.
he started slowly in 1994, losing in the first week at the french open and wimbledon.
nevertheless, he emerged during the hard-court season, winning the canadian open.
his comeback culminated at the 1994 us open with a five-set fourth-round victory against michael chang.
he then became the first man to capture the us open as an unseeded player, beating michael stich in the final.
along the way, he beat 5 seeded players.
in 1995, agassi shaved his balding head, breaking with his old "image is everything" style.
he competed in the 1995 australian open (his first appearance at the event) and won, beating sampras in a four-set final.
agassi and sampras met in five tournament finals in 1995, all on hardcourt, with agassi winning three.
agassi won three masters series events in 1995 (cincinnati, key biscayne, and the canadian open) and seven titles total.
the streak ended the next day when agassi lost the final to sampras.
agassi reached the world no.
1 ranking for the first time in april 1995.
he held that ranking until november, for a total of 30 weeks.
agassi skipped most of the fall indoor season which allowed sampras to surpass him and finish ranked no.
1 at the year-end ranking.
in terms of win/loss record, 1995 was agassi's best year.
1996 was a less successful year for agassi, as he failed to reach any grand slam final.
the high point for agassi was winning the men's singles gold medal at the olympic games in atlanta, beating sergi bruguera of spain in the final.
agassi also successfully defended his singles titles in cincinnati and key biscayne.
1997 was the low point of agassi's career.
his wrist injury resurfaced, and he played only 24 matches during the year.
he later confessed that he started using crystal methamphetamine at that time, allegedly on the urging of a friend.
he failed an atp drug test, but wrote a letter claiming the same friend had spiked a drink.
the atp dropped the failed drug test as a warning.
in his autobiography, agassi admitted that the letter was a lie.
he quit the drug soon after.
at this time agassi was also in a failing marriage with actress, model, and socialite brooke shields and had lost interest in the game.
he won no top-level titles, and his ranking sank to no.
in 1998, agassi won five titles and leapt from no.
110 to no.
6, the highest jump into the top 10 made by any player during a calendar year.
at wimbledon, he had an early loss in the second round to tommy haas.
he won five titles in ten finals and was runner-up at the masters series tournament in key biscayne, losing to marcelo ríos, who became no.
1 as a result.
only laver, agassi, federer, nadal and djokovic have achieved this feat during the open era.
agassi followed his 1999 french open victory by reaching the wimbledon final, where he lost to sampras in straight sets.
overall during the year agassi won 5 titles including two majors and the atp masters series in paris, where he beat marat safin.
agassi ended 1999 as the no.
1, ending sampras's record of six consecutive year-ending top rankings (1993–98).
this was the only time agassi ended the year at no.
he began the next year by capturing his second australian open title, beating sampras in a five-set semi-final and yevgeny kafelnikov in a four-set final.
he was the first male player to have reached four consecutive grand slam finals since rod laver achieved the grand slam in 1969.
1 in the history of tennis.
agassi then lost to gustavo kuerten in the final, allowing kuerten to be crowned year-end no.
agassi opened 2001 by successfully defending his australian open title with a straight-sets final win over arnaud clément.
at wimbledon, they met again in the semi-finals, where agassi lost another close match to rafter, 8–6 in the fifth set.
despite the setback, agassi finished 2001 ranked no.
3, becoming the only male tennis player to finish a year ranked in the top 3 in three different decades (1980s, 1990s, 2000s).
he was also the oldest player at the time (age 31) to finish in the top three since 32-year-old connors finished at no.
2 in 1984.
2002 opened with disappointment for agassi, as injury forced him to skip the australian open, where he was a two-time defending champion.
agassi recovered from the injury and later that year defended his key biscayne title beating then rising roger federer in a four-set final.
the match was the last of sampras's career.
2 at 32 years and 8 months.
the final was his 18th straight win in that tournament, which broke the previous record of 17 set by sampras from 1993 to 1995.
(agassi's winning streak continued to 20 after winning his first two matches at the 2004 edition of that tournament before bowing to agustín calleri.)
on april 28, 2003, he recaptured the no.
the record was later surpassed by roger federer in 2018.
he had held the no.
1 ranking for two weeks, when lleyton hewitt took it back on may 12, 2003.
agassi then recaptured the no.
1 ranking once again on june 16, 2003, which he held for 12 weeks until september 7, 2003.
there he managed to reach the us open semi-finals, where he lost to juan carlos ferrero, surrendering his no.
1 ranking to him.
during his career, agassi held the ranking for a total of 101 weeks.
agassi's ranking slipped when injuries forced him to withdraw from a number of events.
at the year-end tennis masters cup, agassi lost in the final to federer and finished the year ranked no.
at age 33, he had been one of the oldest players to rank in the top 5 since connors, at age 35, was no.
4 in 1987.
he finished the year ranked no.
8, one of the oldest players to finish in the top 10 since the 36-year-old connors was no.
7 in 1988.
agassi's 2005 began with a quarterfinal loss to federer at the australian open.
agassi had several other deep runs at tournaments, but had to withdraw from several events due to injury.
he lost to jarkko nieminen in the first round of the french open.
he won his fourth title in los angeles and reached the final of the rogers cup, before falling to no.
2 rafael nadal.
agassi's 2005 was defined by an improbable run to the us open final.
after beating răzvan sabău and ivo karlović in straight sets and tomáš berdych in four sets, agassi won three consecutive five-set matches to advance to the final.
the most notable of these matches was his quarterfinal victory over james blake, where he rallied from two sets down to win in the fifth set tie-breaker.
his other five-set victories were on xavier malisse in the fourth round and robby ginepri in the semi-finals.
in the final, agassi faced federer, who was seeking his second consecutive us open title and his sixth grand slam title in two years.
federer defeated agassi in four sets.
agassi finished 2005 ranked no.
7, his 16th time in the year-end top-10 rankings, which tied connors for the most times ranked in the top 10 at year's end.
this caused his ranking to drop out of the top 10 for the last time.
agassi returned for the grass-court season, playing a tune-up, and then wimbledon.
he was defeated in the third round by world no.
2 (and eventual runner-up) rafael nadal.
against conventions, agassi, the losing player, was interviewed on court after the match.
at wimbledon, agassi announced his plans to retire following the us open.
agassi had a short, but dramatic, run in his final us open.
because of extreme back pain, agassi was forced to receive anti-inflammatory injections after every match.
agassi won in five tough sets as the younger baghdatis succumbed to muscle cramping in the final set.
in his last match, agassi fell to 112th-ranked big-serving benjamin becker of germany in four sets.
agassi received a four-minute standing ovation from the crowd after the match and delivered a retirement speech.
they also had very contrasting playing styles, with sampras being considered the greatest server and agassi the greatest serve returner at the time.
agassi and sampras met 34 times on the tour level with agassi trailing 14–20.
the 1990 us open was their first meeting in a grand slam tournament final.
agassi was favored as he was ranked no.
4 at the time, compared to the no.
12 ranking of sampras and because agassi had defeated sampras in their only previously completed match.
agassi, however, lost the final to sampras in straight sets.
their next meeting in a grand slam was at the 1992 french open, where they met in the quarterfinals.
although sampras was ranked higher, agassi came out winning in straight sets.
with both sampras and agassi participating, the us won the davis cup in 1995.
agassi won three of the finals, including the australian open; however, sampras took the us open title, ending agassi's 26-match winning streak.
after agassi had taken most of the fall season off, sampras took over the no.
1 ranking for the end of the season.
in the following 3 years, while sampras continued winning grand slam titles every season, agassi slumped in the rankings and struggled in major competitions.
the next time sampras and agassi met in a grand slam final was at wimbledon in 1999, where sampras won in straight sets.
sampras forfeited the no.
1 ranking to agassi when injury forced him to withdraw from that year's us open, which agassi went on to win.
they faced each other twice in the season-ending atp tour world championships, with sampras losing the round-robin match, but winning the final.
in the 2000s, they met three more times on the grand slam level offering three memorable contests.
in 2000, the top-ranked agassi defeated no.
in arguably their most memorable match ever, sampras defeated agassi in the 2001 us open quarterfinals in four sets.
there were no breaks of serve during the entire match.
their last meeting was the final of the 2002 us open, which was their third meeting in a us open final, but the first since 1995.
the match was also notable because they had defeated several up-and-coming players en route to the final.
sampras had defeated no.
3 tommy haas in the fourth round and future no.
1 andy roddick in the quarterfinals, while agassi had defeated no.
1 and defending champion lleyton hewitt in the semi-finals.
sampras defeated agassi in four sets.
this was the final atp tour singles match of sampras's career.
michael chang was the opponent agassi faced most frequently from all the players other than sampras.
they met 22 times on the tour level with agassi leading 15–7.
chang, unlike most of agassi's big rivals, had a playing style similar to his.
both players preferred to stay at the baseline with chang being more defensive-minded.
the outcome was that most of their meetings were built on long and entertaining rallies.
the rivalry began late in the 1980s with both players being considered the prodigies of the next great generation of american tennis players and both having foreign descent.
arguably their best match took place in the round of 16 of the 1994 us open.
while both players presented high-quality shot-making, the momentum changed from set to set with agassi eventually prevailing in a five-set victory.
it turned out to be the toughest contest on his way to his first us open title.
their next two grand slam meetings came in 1996, with chang recording easy straight-set victories in the semi-finals of both the australian open and the us open.
agassi won the last four of their matches, with the last being in 2003 at the miami open with chang being clearly past his prime.
boris becker and agassi played 14 times with agassi leading 10–4.
becker won their first three matches in 1988 and 1989 before agassi reversed the rivalry in 1990, and won 10 of their last 11 matches.
they first played at indian wells in 1988, with becker prevailing.
their most notable match was the 1989 davis cup semi-final match, which becker won in five sets after losing the first two in tiebreaks.
the intensity of the rivalry peaked in 1995.
becker won that year's wimbledon semi-final after being down a set and two breaks, to eventually win in four sets.
in a highly anticipated rematch in the us open semi-final, this time it was agassi who came out victorious in four tight sets.
their final match was played at hong kong in 1999, which agassi won in three sets.
agassi and pat rafter played fifteen times with agassi leading 10–5.
agassi led 8–2 on hard courts, but rafter surprisingly won their sole match on clay at the 1999 rome masters.
they played four matches at wimbledon with both winning two matches each.
agassi also won both their meetings at the australian open, in 1995 and 2001, on his way to the title on both occasions.
rafter, however, took their only us open encounter in 1997 and went on to win the title.
agassi and roger federer played 11 times, and federer led their head-to-head series 8–3.
agassi won their first three matches, but then went on to lose eight consecutive ones.
they first met in just the third tournament of federer's career at the 1998 swiss indoors in federer's hometown, with agassi prevailing over the 17-year-old.
agassi also defeated federer at the 2001 us open and the finals of the miami open in 2002.
federer began to turn the tide at the masters cup in 2003, when he defeated agassi in both the round robin and the final.
they played a memorable quarterfinal match at the 2004 us open that spanned over two windy days, with federer eventually prevailing in five sets.
their final duel took place in the final of the 2005 us open.
in the historic clash of generations, federer was victorious in four sets in front of a pro-agassi crowd.
the match was the last appearance by agassi in any tournament final.
agassi and ivan lendl played 8 times, and lendl led their head-to-head series 6–2.
agassi and stefan edberg played 9 times, and agassi led their head-to-head series 6–3.
he also earned more than $25 million a year through endorsements during his career, which was ranked fourth in all sports at the time.
since retiring after the 2006 us open, agassi has participated in a series of charity tournaments and continues his work with his own charity.
on september 5, 2007, he was a surprise guest commentator for the andy roddick/roger federer us open quarterfinal.
he played an exhibition match at wimbledon, teaming with his wife, steffi graf, to play with tim henman and kim clijsters.
he played world team tennis for the philadelphia freedoms in the summer of 2009.
also in 2009, agassi played at the outback champions series event for the first time.
he played the cancer treatment centers of america tennis championships at surprise, arizona, where he reached the final before bowing to eventual champion todd martin.
he also announced that he will not be playing the tour on a full-time basis, and played the tournament as a favor to long-time friend jim courier.
agassi returned to the tour renamed for the powershares series in 2011 and participated in a total of seven events while winning two.
agassi beat courier in the final of the staples champions cup in boston and later defeated sampras at the ctca championships at his hometown las vegas.
in 2012, agassi took part in five tournaments, winning three of those.
in november, at first he won bilt champions showdown in san jose, beating john mcenroe in the final.
the following day, he defended his title of the ctca championships, while defeating courier in the decisive match.
in the series season finale, he beat michael chang for the acura champions cup.
the series and agassi came back to action in 2014.
agassi won both tournaments he participated in.
at the camden wealth advisors cup's final in houston, agassi beat james blake for a rematch of their 2005 us open quarterfinal.
he defeated blake again in portland to win the title of the cancer treatment centers of america championships.
in 2015, agassi took part in just one event of the powershares series, losing to mark philippoussis in the final of the champions shootout.
in 2009, in macau agassi and sampras met for the first time on court since the 2002 us open final.
sampras won the exhibition in three sets.
after the event, agassi admitted that he had crossed the line with his jokes and publicly apologized to sampras.
on march 3, 2014, agassi and sampras squared off for an exhibition in london for the annual world tennis day.
this time, it was agassi who came out on top in two straight sets.
he returned to the tour in may 2017 in the position of coach to novak djokovic for the french open.
agassi announced the end of the partnership on march 31, 2018, stating that there were too many disagreements in the relationship.
on the rare occasion that he charged the net, agassi liked to take the ball in the air and hit a swinging volley for a winner.
his favored groundstroke was his flat, accurate two-handed backhand, hit well cross-court but especially down the line.
his forehand was nearly as strong, especially his inside-out to the ad court.
agassi's strength was in dictating play from the baseline, and he was able to consistently take the ball on the rise.
while he was growing up, his father and nick bollettieri trained him in this way.
this change to more methodical, less aggressive baseline play was largely initiated by his longtime coach, brad gilbert, in their first year together in 1994.
a signature play later in his career was a change up drop shot to the deuce court after deep penetrating groundstrokes.
this would often be followed by a passing shot or lob if the opponent was fast enough to retrieve it.
his strongest surface over the course of his career, was indeed hardcourt, where he won six of his eight majors.
agassi established a limited liability company named andre agassi ventures (formerly named agassi enterprises).
the restaurant closed down in 2001.
in 2002, he joined the tennis channel to promote the channel to consumers and cable and satellite industry, and made an equity investment in the network.
agassi was an equity investor of a group that acquired golden nugget las vegas and golden nugget laughlin from mgm mirage for $215 million in 2004.
one year later, the group sold the hotel-casino to landry's, inc. for $163 million in cash and $182 million in assumed debt.
in 2007, he sat on the board of meadows bank, an independent bank in nevada.
he has invested in start-up companies backed by allen & company.
agassi and graf formed a company called agassi graf holdings.
they invested in pure, a nightclub at caesars palace, which opened in 2004, and sold it to angel management group in 2010.
in august 2006, agassi and graf developed a joint venture with high-end furniture maker kreiss enterprises.
they launched a furniture line called agassi graf collection.
due to difficult market conditions and delays, they withdrew from the project in 2009.
the group still owns three small chunks of land.
in september, they collaborated with steve case's exclusive resorts to co-develop luxury resorts and design agassi-graf tennis and fitness centers.
they also invested in online ticket reseller viagogo in 2009 and both serve as board members and advisors of the company.
village roadshow has a 51% stake in the park while agassi, graf, and other private investors hold the remaining 49%.
the park opened in may 2013.
img managed agassi from the time he turned pro in 1986 through january 2000 before switching to sfx sports group.
his business manager, lawyer and agent was childhood friend perry rogers, but they have been estranged since 2008.
in 2009, he and graf signed with caa.
agassi used prince graphite rackets early in his career.
he signed a $7 million endorsement contract with belgian tennis racquet makers donnay.
he later switched to head ti radical racket and head's liquidmetal radical racket, having signed a multimillion-dollar endorsement deal with head in 1993.
he renewed his contract in 1999, and in november 2003 he signed a lifetime agreement with head.
he also endorses penn tennis balls.
on july 25, 2005, agassi left nike after 17 years and signed an endorsement deal with adidas.
a major reason for agassi leaving nike was because nike refused to donate to agassi's charities, and adidas was more than happy to do so.
on may 13, 2013, agassi rejoined nike.
in 1990, he appeared in a television commercial for canon inc., promoting the canon eos rebel camera.
between 1999 and 2000, he signed a multimillion-dollar, multiyear endorsement deal with schick and became the worldwide spokesman for the company.
agassi signed a multiyear contract with twinlab and promoted the company's nutritional supplements.
in mid-2003, he was named the spokesman of aramis life, a fragrance by aramis, and signed a five-year deal with the company.
in 2007, watchmaker longines named agassi as their brand ambassador.
agassi and his mother appeared in a got milk?
advertisement in 2002.
agassi has appeared in many advertisements and television commercials with graf.
in the early 1990s, after dating wendi stewart, agassi dated american singer and entertainer barbra streisand.
we're sympatico, and the public outcry only adds spice to our connection.
it makes our friendship feel forbidden, taboo – another piece of my overall rebellion.
dating barbra streisand is like wearing hot lava."
he was married to brooke shields from 1997 to 1999.
he married steffi graf on october 22, 2001 at their las vegas home; the only witnesses were their mothers.
they have two children: son jaden gil (born 2001) and daughter jaz elle (born 2003).
agassi has said that he and graf are not pushing their children toward becoming tennis players.
the graf-agassi family resides in summerlin, a community in the las vegas valley.
graf's mother and brother, michael, with his four children also live there.
long-time trainer gil reyes has been called one of agassi's closest friends; some have described him as being a "father figure" to agassi.
in 2012, agassi and reyes introduced their own line of fitness equipment, bilt by agassi and reyes.
agassi's autobiography, , (written with assistance from j. r. moehringer), was published in november 2009.
in it, agassi talks about his childhood and his unconventional armenian father, who came to the united states from iran where he was a professional boxer.
there is also mention in the book of using and testing positive for methamphetamine in 1997.
agassi said that he had always hated tennis during his career because of the constant pressure it exerted on him.
he also said he wore a hairpiece earlier in his career and thought pete sampras was "robotic".
the book reached no.
1 on the "new york times" best seller list and received favorable reviews.
it won the autobiography category of the 2010 british sports book awards.
in 2017, agassi appeared in the documentary film "love means zero", which highlighted the troubled relationship between his coach nick bollettieri and him.
agassi has donated more than $100,000 to democratic candidates, and $2000 to republicans.
agassi founded the andre agassi charitable association in 1994, which assists las vegas' young people.
he was awarded the atp arthur ashe humanitarian award in 1995 for his efforts to help disadvantaged youth.
he has been cited as the most charitable and socially involved player in professional tennis.
it has also been claimed that he may be the most charitable athlete of his generation.
agassi's charities help in assisting children reach their athletic potential.
his boys & girls club sees 2,000 children throughout the year and boasts a world-class junior tennis team.
it also has a basketball program (the agassi stars) and a rigorous system that encourages a mix of academics and athletics.
in 2001, agassi opened the andre agassi college preparatory academy in las vegas, a tuition-free charter school for at-risk children in the area.
he personally donated $35 million to the school.
in 2009, the graduating class had a 100 percent graduation rate and expected a 100 percent college acceptance rate.
among other child-related programs that agassi supports through his andre agassi charitable foundation is clark county's only residential facility for abused and neglected children, child haven.
in 1997, agassi donated funding to child haven for a six-room classroom building now named the agassi center for education.
his foundation also provided $720,000 to assist in the building of the andre agassi cottage for medically fragile children.
this 20-bed facility opened in december 2001, and accommodates developmentally delayed or handicapped children and children quarantined for infectious diseases.
he created the canyon-agassi charter school facilities fund, now known as the turner-agassi charter school facilities fund.
the fund is an investment initiative for social change, focusing on the "nationwide effort to move charters from stopgap buildings into permanent campuses."
all proceeds go to the foundation.
in february 2014, agassi remodeled the vacant university of phoenix building as a new school called the doral academy west through the canyon-agassi charter school facilities fund.
doral academy opened in august 2014.
the fund purchased a 4.6-acre plot in henderson, nevada to house the somerset academy of las vegas, which will relocate from its campus inside a church.
by winning the 1999 french open, agassi completed a men's singles career grand slam.
as a result, he is credited for helping to revive the popularity of tennis during the 1990s.
there are around 117 million speakers of austroasiatic languages.
the mon language is a recognised indigenous language in myanmar and thailand.
in myanmar, the wa language is the de facto official language of wa state.
santali is one of the 22 scheduled languages of india.
the rest of the languages are spoken by minority groups and have no official status.
"ethnologue" identifies 168 austroasiatic languages.
the name "austroasiatic" comes from a combination of the latin words for "south" and "asia", hence "south asia".
languages in the pearic branch and some in the vietic branch can have a three- or even four-way voicing contrast.
however, some austroasiatic languages have lost the register contrast by evolving more diphthongs or in a few cases, such as vietnamese, tonogenesis.
much work has been done on the reconstruction of proto-mon–khmer in harry l. shorto's "mon–khmer comparative dictionary".
little work has been done on the munda languages, which are not well documented.
with their demotion from a primary branch, proto-mon–khmer becomes synonymous with proto-austroasiatic.
paul sidwell (2005) reconstructs the consonant inventory of proto-mon–khmer as follows: this is identical to earlier reconstructions except for .
is better preserved in the katuic languages, which sidwell has specialized in.
however, no evidence for this classification has ever been published.
each of the families that is written in boldface type below is accepted as a valid clade.
by contrast, the relationships "between" these families within austroasiatic are debated.
in addition to the traditional classification, two recent proposals are given, neither of which accepts traditional "mon–khmer" as a valid unit.
however, little of the data used for competing classifications has ever been published, and therefore cannot be evaluated by peer review.
peiros is a lexicostatistic classification, based on percentages of shared vocabulary.
this means that languages can appear to be more distantly related than they actually are due to language contact.
diffloth compares reconstructions of various clades, and attempts to classify them based on shared innovations, though like other classifications the evidence has not been published.
as a schematic, we have: or in more detail, this family tree is consistent with recent studies of migration of y-chromosomal haplogroup o2a1-m95.
however, the dates obtained from by zhivotovsky method dna studies are several times older than that given by linguists.
the route map of the people with haplogroup o2a1-m95, speaking this language can be seen in this link.
other geneticists criticise the zhivotovsky method.
he therefore takes the conservative view that the thirteen branches of austroasiatic should be treated as equidistant on current evidence.
if this would the case, sidwell & blench suggest that khasic may have been an early offshoot of palaungic that had spread westward.
sidwell & blench (2011) suggest shompen as an additional branch, and believe that a vieto-katuic connection is worth investigating.
subsequently, sidwell (2015a: 179) proposed that nicobarese subgroups with aslian, just as how khasian and palaungic subgroup with each other.
sidwell (2015c) tentatively suggests that austroasiatic may have begun to split up 5,000 years b.p.
during the neolithic transition era of mainland southeast asia, with all the major branches of austroasiatic formed by 4,000 b.p.
both the reconstructed lexicon of proto-austroasiatic and the archaeological record clearly show that early austroasiatic speakers around 4,000 b.p.
cultivated rice and millet, kept livestock such as dogs, pigs, and chickens, and thrived mostly in estuarine rather than coastal environments.
and in southern indochina by 3,800 b.p.
underwent more extensive internal diversification.
paul sidwell (2018) considers the austroasiatic language family to have rapidly diversified around 4,000 years b.p.
during the arrival of rice agriculture in indochina, but notes that the origin of proto-austroasiatic itself is older than that date.
the lexicon of proto-austroasiatic can be divided into an early and late stratum.
blench (2017) finds widespread austroasiatic roots for 'river, valley', 'boat', 'fish', 'catfish sp.
(2,000 bc), with agriculture ultimately being introduced from further up to the north in the yangtze valley where it has been dated to 6,000 b.p.
hence, this points to a relatively late riverine dispersal of austroasiatic as compared to sino-tibetan, whose speakers had a distinct non-riverine culture.
in addition to living an aquatic-based lifestyle, early austroasiatic speakers would have also had access to livestock, crops, and newer types of watercraft.
peterson notes that eastern indo-aryan languages display many morphosyntactic features similar to those of munda languages, while western indo-aryan languages do not.
other than latin-based alphabets, many austroasiatic languages are written with the khmer, thai, lao, and burmese alphabets.
vietnamese divergently had an indigenous script based on chinese logographic writing.
this has since been supplanted by the latin alphabet in the 20th century.
the following are examples of past-used alphabets or current alphabets of austroasiatic languages.
this could imply a relation or early language contact along the yangtze.
according to cai (et al.
2011), hmong–mien is at least partially related to austroasiatic but was heavily influenced by sino-tibetan, especially tibeto-burman languages.
it is suggested that the austroasiatic languages have some influence on indo-aryan languages including sanskrit and middle indo-aryan languages.
indian linguist suniti kumar chatterji pointed that a specific number of substantives in languages such as hindi, punjabi and bengali were borrowed from munda languages.
another study suggests that the haplogroup o1b1 is the major austroasiatic paternal lineage and o1b2 the “para-austroasiatic” lineage of the yayoi people.
according to riccio et al., the munda people are likely descended from austroasiatic migrants from southeast asia.
according to zhang et al., austroasiatic migrations from southeast asia into india took place after the last glacial maximum, circa 10,000 years ago.
arunkumar et al.
suggest austroasiatic migrations from southeast asia occurred into northeast india 5.2 ± 0.6 kya and into east india 4.3 ± 0.2 kya.
afroasiatic languages have over 495 million native speakers, the fourth largest number of any language family (after indo-european, sino-tibetan and niger–congo).
the phylum has six branches: berber, chadic, cushitic, egyptian, omotic and semitic.
by far the most widely spoken afroasiatic language or dialect continuum is arabic.
the original homeland of the afroasiatic family, and when the parent language (i.e.
proto-afroasiatic) was spoken, are yet to be agreed upon by historical linguists.
proposed locations include the horn of africa, north africa, the eastern sahara and the levant.
by the 1860s, the main constituent elements within the broader afroasiatic family had been worked out.
friedrich müller introduced the name "hamito-semitic" for the entire language family in his "grundriss der sprachwissenschaft" (1876).
maurice delafosse (1914) later coined the term "afroasiatic" (often now spelled "afro-asiatic").
however, it did not come into general use until joseph greenberg (1950) formally proposed its adoption.
in doing so, greenberg sought to emphasize the fact that 'hamitic' was not a valid group and that language cladistics did not reflect race.
individual scholars have also called the family "erythraean" (tucker 1966) and "lisramic" (hodge 1972).
he knew of semitic through his study of arabic, hebrew, and aramaic.
in the course of the 19th century, europeans also began suggesting such relationships.
in 1844, theodor benfey suggested a language family consisting of semitic, berber, and cushitic (calling the latter "ethiopic").
in the same year, t.n.
newman suggested a relationship between semitic and hausa, but this would long remain a topic of dispute and uncertainty.
it was the egyptologist karl richard lepsius (1810–1884) who restricted hamitic to the non-semitic languages in africa, which are characterized by a grammatical gender system.
unlike müller, lepsius considered that hausa and nama were part of the hamitic group.
these classifications relied in part on non-linguistic anthropological and racial arguments.
both authors used the skin-color, mode of subsistence, and other characteristics of native speakers as part of their arguments that particular languages should be grouped together.
meinhof's model was widely supported into the 1940s.
leo reinisch (1909) had already proposed linking cushitic and chadic, while urging their more distant affinity with egyptian and semitic.
however, his suggestion found little acceptance.
finally, joseph greenberg's 1950 work led to the widespread rejection of "hamitic" as a language category by linguists.
greenberg refuted meinhof's linguistic theories, and rejected the use of racial and social evidence.
he consequently rejoined meinhof's so-called nilo-hamitic languages with their appropriate nilotic siblings.
he also added (and sub-classified) the chadic languages, and proposed the new name afroasiatic for the family.
almost all scholars have accepted this classification as the new and continued consensus.
each of these branches is instead now regarded as an independent subgroup of the larger afroasiatic family.
this proposal and name have met with widespread acceptance.
most scholars, however, reject this proposal, and continue to group beja as the sole member of a northern branch within cushitic.
"glottolog" does not accept that the inclusion or even unity of omotic has been established, nor that of ongota or the unclassified kujarge.
little agreement exists on the subgrouping of the five or six branches of afroasiatic: semitic, egyptian, berber, chadic, cushitic, and omotic.
it is one of the few whose speech area is transcontinental, with languages from afroasiatic's semitic branch also spoken in the middle east and europe.
there are no generally accepted relations between afroasiatic and any other language family.
however, several proposals grouping afroasiatic with one or more other language families have been made.
symbols on gerzean (naqada ii) pottery resembling egyptian hieroglyphs date back to c. 4000 bc, suggesting an earlier possible dating.
this gives us a minimum date for the age of afroasiatic.
however, ancient egyptian is highly divergent from proto-afroasiatic (trombetti 1905: 1–2), and considerable time must have elapsed in between them.
estimates of the date at which the proto-afroasiatic language was spoken vary widely.
they fall within a range between approximately 7,500 bc (9,500 years ago), and approximately 16,000 bc (18,000 years ago).
according to igor m. diakonoff (1988: 33n), proto-afroasiatic was spoken c. 10,000 bc.
christopher ehret (2002: 35–36) asserts that proto-afroasiatic was spoken c. 11,000 bc at the latest, and possibly as early as c. 16,000 bc.
these dates are older than those associated with other proto-languages.
afroasiatic languages are today primarily spoken in west asia, north africa, the horn of africa, and parts of the sahel.
their distribution seems to have been influenced by the sahara pump operating over the last 10,000 years.
there is no agreement when or where the original homeland of this language family existed.
the main theories of urheimat are the levant/fertile crescent, the eastern sahara, north africa and the horn of africa.
according to ehret (1996), tonal languages appear in the omotic and chadic branches of afroasiatic, as well as in certain cushitic languages.
the semitic, berber and egyptian branches generally do not use tones phonemically.
the following are some examples of afroasiatic cognates, including ten pronouns, three nouns, and three verbs.
there are two etymological dictionaries of afroasiatic, one by christopher ehret, and one by vladimir orel and olga stolbova.
the two dictionaries disagree on almost everything.
the present principality was formed by a charter in 1278.
andorra is the sixth-smallest nation in europe, having an area of and a population of approximately .
the andorran people are a romance ethnic group of originally catalan descent.
andorra is the 16th-smallest country in the world by land and the 11th-smallest by population.
its capital, andorra la vella, is the highest capital city in europe, at an elevation of above sea level.
the official language is catalan, but spanish, portuguese, and french are also commonly spoken.
tourism in andorra sees an estimated 10.2 million visitors annually.
andorra is not a member of the european union, but the euro is its official currency.
it has been a member of the united nations since 1993.
in 2013, andorra had the highest life expectancy in the world at 81 years, according to the global burden of disease study.
the origin of the word andorra is unknown, although several hypotheses have been formulated.
the word andosini or andosins (ἀνδοσίνοι) may derive from the basque "handia" whose meaning is "big" or "giant".
the andorran toponymy shows evidence of basque language in the area.
another theory suggests that the word andorra may derive from the old word anorra that contains the basque word "ur" (water).
another theory suggests that andorra may derive from arabic "al-darra" (الدرة), meaning "the thickly wooded place".
when the arabs and moors conquered the iberian peninsula, the valleys of the high pyrenees were covered by large tracts of forest.
these regions were not administered by muslims, because of the geographic difficulty of direct rule.
other theories suggest that the term derives from the navarro-aragonese andurrial, which means "land covered with bushes" or "scrubland".
the seasonal camp was perfectly located for hunting and fishing by the groups of hunter-gatherers from ariege and segre.
the population of the valley grew cereals, raised domestic livestock, and developed a commercial trade with people from the segre and occitania.
the model of small settlements began to evolve to a complex urbanism during the bronze age.
metallurgical items of iron, ancient coins, and relicaries can be found in the ancient sanctuaries scattered around the country.
influenced by the aquitanian, basque and iberian languages, the locals developed some current toponyms.
the presence of roman influence is recorded from the 2nd century bc to the 5th century ad.
the visigoths remained in the valleys for 200 years, during which time christianity spread.
when the muslim empire of al-andalus replaced the ruling visigoths in most of the iberian peninsula, andorra was sheltered from these invaders by the franks.
in 988, borrell ii, count of urgell, gave the andorran valleys to the diocese of urgell in exchange for land in cerdanya.
since then, the bishop of urgell, based in seu d'urgell, has been co-prince of andorra.
the old document dated from 839 depicts the six old parishes of the andorran valleys and therefore the administrative division of the country.
in 1095, the lord of caboet and the bishop of urgell signed under oath a declaration of their co-sovereignty over andorra.
arnalda, daughter of arnau of caboet, married the viscount of castellbò.
their daughter, ermessenda, married the count of foix, roger-bernard ii.
roger-bernard ii and ermessenda shared ruled over andorra with the bishop of urgell.
in the 13th century, a military dispute arose between the bishop of urgell and the count of foix as aftermath of the cathar crusade.
this gave the principality its territory and political form.
a second paréage was signed in 1288 after a dispute when the count of foix ordered the construction of a castle in roc d'enclar.
the document was ratified by the noble notary jaume orig of puigcerdà and the construction of military structures in the country was prohibited.
the catalan pyrenees were embryonic of the catalan language at the end of the 11th century.
andorra was influenced by this language, which was adopted locally decades before it expanded to the rest of the crown of aragon.
the local population based its economy during the middle ages in livestock and agriculture, as well as in furs and weavers.
with the passage of time, the co-title to andorra passed to the kings of navarre.
the fair of andorra la vella was ratified by the co-princes in 1371 and 1448 being the most important annual national festival commercially ever since.
three centuries after its foundation the consell de la terra located its headquarters and the tribunal de corts in casa de la vall in 1702.
the manor house built in 1580 served as a noble fortress of the busquets family.
after the french revolution in 1809, napoleon i reestablished the co-principate and removed the french medieval title.
in 1814, an imperial decree reestablished the independence and economy of andorra.
during this period, andorra's late medieval institutions and rural culture remained largely unchanged.
in 1866, the syndic guillem d'areny-plandolit led the reformist group in a council general of 24 members elected by suffrage limited to heads of families.
the council general replaced the aristocratic oligarchy that previously ruled the state.
the new reform () began after ratification by both co-princes and established the basis of the constitution and symbols—such as the tricolor flag—of andorra.
a new service economy arose as a demand of the valley inhabitants and began to build infrastructure such as hotels, spa resorts, roads and telegraph lines.
the authorities of the co-princes banned casinos and betting houses throughout the country.
the ban resulted in an economic conflict for the andorran people.
the provisional revolutionary council allowed for the construction of casinos and spas by foreign companies.
after a day of combat the treaty of the bridge of escalls was signed on 10 june.
the council was replaced and new elections were held.
the economic situation worsened, as the populace was divided over the  – the "andorran question" in relation to the eastern question).
the struggles continued between pro-bishops, pro-french, and nationalists based on the troubles of canillo in 1882 and 1885.
andorra participated in the cultural movement of the catalan renaixença.
between 1882 and 1887, the first academic schools were formed where trilingualism coexisted with the official language, catalan.
romantic authors from france and spain reported the awakening of the national consciousness of the country.
jacint verdaguer lived in ordino during the 1880s where he wrote and shared works related to the renaixença with writer and photographer, joaquim de riba.
andorra declared war on imperial germany during world war i, but did not take part directly in the fighting.
some andorrans volunteered to take part in the conflict as part of the french legions.
it remained in an official state of belligerency until 1958 as it was not included in the treaty of versailles.
the 5 april 1933 joves andorrans seized the andorran parliament.
he was arrested by the co-prince and bishop justí guitart i vilardebó and their authorities on 20 july and ultimately expelled from spain.
francoist troops reached the andorran border in the later stages of the war.
during world war ii, andorra remained neutral and was an important smuggling route between vichy france and francoist spain, two fascist states.
general council members justified the council's political and diplomatic actions as necessary for andorra's survival and the protection of its sovereignty.
andorra was relatively unscathed by the two world wars and the spanish civil war.
certain groups organized themselves to help victims of oppression in nazi-occupied countries, while participating in smuggling to help andorra survive.
among the groups that were most prominent there was the hostal palanques evasion network command.
the evasion network command, in contact with the british mi6, helped almost 400 fugitives, among whom were allied military personnel.
the command remained active between 1941 and 1944, although there were struggles with pro-axis informers and gestapo agents within andorra.
the andorran opening to the capitalist economy resulted in two axes: mass tourism and the country's tax exemption.
shortly after activities such as skiing and shopping become a tourist attraction, with the inauguration of ski resorts and cultural entities in the late 1930s.
all in all, a renovated hotel industry has developed.
in april 1968 a social health insurance system was created (cass).
so much so that andorra achieved a gdp per capita and a life expectancy higher than the most standard countries of the current economy.
given its relative isolation, andorra has existed outside the mainstream of european history, with few ties to countries other than france, spain and portugal.
in recent times, however, its thriving tourist industry along with developments in transport and communications have removed the country from its isolation.
in 1989 the principality signed an agreement with the european economic community to regularize trade relations.
the first elections under the new constitution were held later in the year.
the same year andorra became a member of the united nations and the council of europe.
andorra is a parliamentary co-principality with the president of france and the catholic bishop of urgell (catalonia, spain) as co-princes.
the current head of government is xavier espot zamora of the democrats for andorra (da).
executive power is exercised by the government.
legislative power is vested in both government and parliament.
the parliament of andorra is known as the general council.
the general council consists of between 28 and 42 councillors.
the councillors serve for four-year terms, and elections are held between the 30th and 40th days following the dissolution of the previous council.
half are elected in equal numbers by each of the seven administrative parishes, and the other half of the councillors are elected in a single national constituency.
fifteen days after the election, the councillors hold their inauguration.
during this session, the syndic general, who is the head of the general council, and the subsyndic general, his assistant, are elected.
eight days later, the council convenes once more.
during this session the head of government is chosen from among the councillors.
candidates can be proposed by a minimum of one-fifth of the councillors.
the council then elects the candidate with the absolute majority of votes to be head of government.
the syndic general then notifies the co-princes, who in turn appoint the elected candidate as the head of government of andorra.
the general council is also responsible for proposing and passing laws.
the council also approves the annual budget of the principality.
the government must submit the proposed budget for parliamentary approval at least two months before the previous budget expires.
if the budget is not approved by the first day of the next year, the previous budget is extended until a new one is approved.
once any bill is approved, the syndic general is responsible for presenting it to the co-princes so that they may sign and enact it.
if the head of government is not satisfied with the council, he may request that the co-princes dissolve the council and order new elections.
in turn, the councillors have the power to remove the head of government from office.
the judiciary is composed of the magistrates court, the criminal law court, the high court of andorra, and the constitutional court.
it is presided over by the member appointed by the syndic general and the judges hold office for six-year terms.
the magistrates and judges are appointed by the high court, as is the president of the criminal law court.
the high court also appoints members of the office of the attorney general.
the constitutional court is responsible for interpreting the constitution and reviewing all appeals of unconstitutionality against laws and treaties.
it is composed of four judges, one appointed by each of the co-princes and two by the general council.
they serve eight-year terms.
the court is presided over by one of the judges on a two-year rotation so that each judge at one point will preside over the court.
andorra does not have its own armed forces, although there is a small ceremonial army.
responsibility for defending the nation rests primarily with france and spain.
andorra has a small army, which has historically been raised or reconstituted at various dates, but has never in modern times amounted to a standing army.
the basic principle of andorran defence is that all able-bodied men are available to fight if called upon by the sounding of the sometent.
being a landlocked country, andorra has no navy.
this body was not liable for service outside the principality and was commanded by two officials (veguers) appointed by france and the bishop of urgell.
in the modern era, the army has consisted of a very small body of volunteers willing to undertake ceremonial duties.
uniforms and weaponry were handed down from generation to generation within families and communities.
the army's role in internal security was largely taken over by the formation of the police corps of andorra in 1931.
the andorran police was reformed in the following year, with eleven soldiers appointed to supervisory roles.
a shotgun per household is unregulated.
rifles and pistols require a license.
the army has not fought for more than 700 years, and its main responsibility is to present the flag of andorra at official ceremonial functions.
according to marc forné molné, andorra's military budget is strictly from voluntary donations, and the availability of full-time volunteers.
andorra maintains a small but modern and well-equipped internal police force, with around 240 police officers supported by civilian assistants.
the principal services supplied by the corps are uniformed community policing, criminal detection, border control, and traffic policing.
there are also small specialist units including police dogs, mountain rescue, and a bomb disposal team.
the "grup d'intervenció policia d'andorra" (gipa) is a small special forces unit trained in counter-terrorism, and hostage recovery tasks.
although it is the closest in style to an active military force, it is part of the police corps, and not the army.
the andorran fire brigade, with headquarters at santa coloma, operates from four modern fire stations, and has a staff of around 120 firefighters.
historically, the families of the six ancient parishes of andorra maintained local arrangements to assist each other in fighting fires.
the first fire pump purchased by the government was acquired in 1943.
andorra's land area is .
phytogeographically, andorra belongs to the atlantic european province of the circumboreal region within the boreal kingdom.
according to the wwf, the territory of andorra belongs to the ecoregion of pyrenees conifer and mixed forests.
andorra has alpine, continental and oceanic climates, depending on altitude.
its higher elevation means there is, on average, more snow in winter and it is slightly cooler in summer.
the great differences of altitude in the minimum and maximum points, together with the influence of a mediterranean climate, develop the climate of the andorran pyrenees.
the temperature regime is characterized, broadly, by a temperate summer and a long and cold winter; in accordance with the mountainous condition of the principality.
tourism, the mainstay of andorra's tiny, well-to-do economy, accounts for roughly 80% of gdp.
an estimated 10.2 million tourists visit annually, attracted by andorra's duty-free status and by its summer and winter resorts.
one of the main sources of income in andorra is tourism from ski resorts which total over of ski ground.
agricultural production is limited; only 5% of the land is arable, and most food has to be imported.
some tobacco is grown locally.
the principal livestock activity is domestic sheep raising.
manufacturing output consists mainly of cigarettes, cigars, and furniture.
andorra's natural resources include hydroelectric power, mineral water, timber, iron ore, and lead.
coins and notes of both the franc and the peseta remained legal tender in andorra until 31 december 2002.
andorra negotiated to issue its own euro coins, beginning in 2014.
andorra has traditionally had one of the world's lowest unemployment rates.
in 2009 it stood at 2.9%.
andorra has long benefited from its status as a tax haven, with revenues raised exclusively through import tariffs.
this led to a growth in unemployment.
the announcement was made following a meeting in paris between the head of government antoni marti and the french president and prince of andorra, françois hollande.
hollande welcomed the move as part of a process of andorra "bringing its taxation in line with international standards".
the population of andorra is estimated at ().
the andorrans are a romance ethnic group of originally catalan descent.
the population has grown from 5,000 in 1900.
two-thirds of residents lack andorran nationality and do not have the right to vote in communal elections.
moreover, they are not allowed to be elected as prime minister or to own more than 33% of the capital stock of a privately held company.
the historic and official language is catalan, a romance language.
the andorran government encourages the use of catalan.
it funds a commission for catalan toponymy in andorra (catalan: ), and provides free catalan classes to assist immigrants.
andorran television and radio stations use catalan.
because of immigration, historical links, and close geographic proximity, spanish, portuguese and french are commonly spoken.
most andorran residents can speak one or more of these, in addition to catalan.
english is less commonly spoken among the general population, though it is understood to varying degrees in the major tourist resorts.
their patron saint is our lady of meritxell.
though it is not an official state religion, the constitution acknowledges a special relationship with the catholic church, offering some special privileges to that group.
other christian denominations include the anglican church, the unification church, the new apostolic church, and jehovah's witnesses.
the small muslim community is primarily made up of north african immigrants.
there is a small community of hindus and bahá'ís, and roughly 100 jews live in andorra.
(see history of the jews in andorra.)
children between the ages of 6 and 16 are required by law to have full-time education.
education up to secondary level is provided free of charge by the government.
parents may choose which system their children attend.
all schools are built and maintained by andorran authorities, but teachers in the french and spanish schools are paid for the most part by france and spain.
39% of andorran children attend andorran schools, 33% attend french schools, and 28% spanish schools.
the universitat d'andorra (uda) is the state public university and is the only university in andorra.
it was established in 1997.
the university provides first-level degrees in nursing, computer science, business administration, and educational sciences, in addition to higher professional education courses.
the only two graduate schools in andorra are the nursing school and the school of computer science, the latter having a phd programme.
the centre also runs various postgraduate programmes and continuing-education courses for professionals.
until the 20th century, andorra had very limited transport links to the outside world, and development of the country was affected by its physical isolation.
even now, the nearest major airports at toulouse and barcelona are both three hours' drive from andorra.
andorra has a road network of , of which is unpaved.
bus services cover all metropolitan areas and many rural communities, with services on most major routes running half-hourly or more frequently during peak travel times.
there are frequent long-distance bus services from andorra to barcelona and toulouse, plus a daily tour from the former city.
bus services mostly are run by private companies, but some local ones are operated by the government.
as of 11 july 2018, there are no regular commercial flights at the airport.
nearby airports located in spain and france provide access to international flights for the principality.
the nearest airports are at perpignan, france ( from andorra) and lleida, spain ( from andorra).
the largest nearby airports are at toulouse, france ( from andorra) and barcelona, spain ( from andorra).
there are hourly bus services from both barcelona and toulouse airports to andorra.
this line is operated by the sncf.
latour-de-carol has a scenic trainline to villefranche-de-conflent, as well as the sncf's gauge line connecting to perpignan, and the renfe's -gauge line to barcelona.
there are also direct intercités de nuit trains between l'hospitalet-près-l'andorre and paris on certain dates.
the same company also manages the technical infrastructure for national broadcasting of digital television and radio.
in 2010 andorra became the first country to provide a direct optical fiber link to all homes (ftth) and businesses.
the first commercial radio station to broadcast was radio andorra, which was active from 1939 to 1981.
in 1990, the public radio was founded on the radio nacional d'andorra.
as an autochthonous television channel, there is only the national public television network andorra televisió, created in 1995.
additional tv and radio stations from spain and france are available via digital terrestrial television and iptv.
there are three national newspapers, "diari d'andorra", "el periòdic d'andorra", and "bondia" as well as several local newspapers.
in 1974, the "poble andorrà" became the first regular newspaper in andorra.
there is also an amateur radio society and news agency ana with independent management.
the official and historic language is catalan.
thus the culture is catalan, with its own specificity.
andorra is home to folk dances like the contrapàs and marratxa, which survive in sant julià de lòria especially.
other andorran folk dances include contrapàs in andorra la vella and saint anne's dance in escaldes-engordany.
andorra's national holiday is our lady of meritxell day, 8 september.
andorra participated regularly in the eurovision song contest between 2004 and 2009, being the only participating country presenting songs in catalan.
andorran gastronomy is mainly catalan, although it has also adopted other elements of french and italian cuisines.
the cuisine of the country has similar characteristics with the neighbors of the cerdanya and the alt urgell, with whom it has a strong cultural ties.
andorra's cuisine is marked by its nature as mountain valleys.
to drink, the mulled wine and beer are also popular.
pre-romanesque and romanesque art are one of the most important artistic manifestations and characteristics of the principality.
the romanesque one allows to know the formation of the parochial communities, the relations of (social and political) power and the national culture.
summer solstice fire festivals in the pyrenees was included as unesco intangible cultural heritage in 2015.
also the madriu-perafita-claror valley became andorra's first, and to date its only, unesco world heritage site in 2004, with a small extension in 2006.
andorra is famous for the practice of winter sports.
andorra has the largest territory of ski slopes in the pyrenees (3100 hectares and about 350 km of slopes) and two ski resorts.
grandvalira is the largest and most popular resort.
other popular sports played in andorra include football, rugby union, basketball, and roller hockey.
for roller hockey, andorra usually plays in cerh euro cup and in firs roller hockey world cup.
in 2011, andorra was the host country to the 2011 european league final eight.
the country is represented in association football by the andorra national football team.
the team gained its first competitive win in a european championship qualifier on 11 october 2019, against moldova.
andorra was admitted to uefa and fifa in the same year, 1996.
fc andorra, a club based in andorra la vella founded in 1942, compete in the spanish football league system.
rugby is a traditional sport in andorra, mainly influenced by the popularity in southern france.
the andorra national rugby union team, nicknamed els isards, plays on the international stage in rugby union and rugby sevens.
vpc andorra xv is a rugby team based in andorra la vella actually playing in the french championship.
basketball popularity has increased in the country since the 1990s, when the andorran team bc andorra played in the top league of spain (liga acb).
after 18 years the club returned to the top league in 2014.
other sports practised in andorra include cycling, volleyball, judo, australian rules football, handball, swimming, gymnastics, tennis, and motorsports.
andorra first participated at the olympic games in 1976.
the country has appeared in every winter olympic games since 1976.
andorra competes in the games of the small states of europe, being twice the host country in 1991 and 2005.
as one of the catalan countries, andorra is home to a team of castellers, or catalan human tower builders.
the , based in the town of santa coloma d'andorra, are recognized by the , the governing body of castells.
the collection is often a set of results of an experiment or an observational study, or frequently a set of results from a survey.
for example, per capita income is the arithmetic average income of a nation's population.
the arithmetic mean is the most commonly used and readily understood measure of central tendency in a data set.
in statistics, the term average refers to any of the measures of central tendency.
the arithmetic mean can be similarly defined for vectors in multiple dimension, not only scalar values; this is often referred to as a centroid.
the arithmetic mean has several properties that make it useful, especially as a measure of central tendency.
these include: the arithmetic mean may be contrasted with the median.
the median is defined such that no more than half the values are larger than, and no more than half are smaller than, the median.
if elements in the data increase arithmetically, when placed in some order, then the median and arithmetic average are equal.
for example, consider the data sample formula_19.
the average is formula_20, as is the median.
in this case, the arithmetic average is 6.2, while the median is 4.
in general, the average value can vary significantly from most values in the sample, and can be larger or smaller than most of them.
there are applications of this phenomenon in many fields.
for example, since the 1980s, the median income in the united states has increased more slowly than the arithmetic average of income.
for example, the arithmetic mean of formula_22 and formula_23 is formula_24, or equivalently formula_25.
here the weights, which necessarily sum to the value one, are formula_27 and formula_28, the former being twice the latter.
this equality does not hold for other probability distributions, as illustrated for the lognormal distribution here.
particular care must be taken when using cyclic data, such as phases or angles.
naively taking the arithmetic mean of 1° and 359° yields a result of 180°.
the arithmetic mean is often denoted by a bar, for example as in formula_2 (read formula_3 "bar").
some software (text processors, web browsers) may not display the x̄ symbol properly.
this conference and its counterpart the national football conference (nfc), currently contain 16 teams organized into 4 divisions.
a series of league expansions and division realignments have occurred since the merger, thus making the current total of 16 clubs in each conference.
like the nfc, the conference has 16 teams organized into four divisions each with four teams: east, north, south and west.
two of these games are assigned on the basis of a particular team's final divisional standing from the previous season.
the remaining 8 games are split between the roster of two other nfl divisions.
this assignment shifts each year and will follow a standard cycle.
using the 2012 regular season schedule as an example, each team in the afc west plays against every team in the afc north and nfc south.
in this way, non-divisional competition will be mostly among common opponents – the exception being the two games assigned based on the team's prior-season divisional standing.
the afc playoffs culminate in the afc championship game with the winner receiving the lamar hunt trophy.
the afc champion then plays the nfc champion in the super bowl.
both the afc and the nfc were created after the nfl merged with the american football league (afl) in 1970.
since the merger, five expansion teams have joined the afc and two have left, thus making the current total 16.
when the seattle seahawks and the tampa bay buccaneers joined the league in 1976, they were temporarily placed in the nfc and afc respectively.
this arrangement lasted for one season only before the two teams switched conferences.
the seahawks eventually returned to the nfc as a result of the 2002 realignment.
the expansion jacksonville jaguars joined the afc in 1995.
there have been five teams that have relocated at least once.
in 1984, the baltimore colts relocated to indianapolis.
the ravens were treated as an expansion team.
the houston oilers moved to tennessee in 1997, where they were renamed the tennessee oilers.
the team would change its name again, two years later, to the tennessee titans.
the nfl would again expand in 2002, adding the houston texans to the afc.
with the exception of the aforementioned relocations since that time, the divisional setup has remained static ever since.
16 of the last 19 afc champions have started one of just three quarterbacks - tom brady, peyton manning and ben roethlisberger - in the super bowl.
the afc has started 6 quarterbacks in the last 19 super bowls, while the nfc has started 16.
the afc logo basically remained unchanged from 1970 to 2009.
nbc aired the afc's sunday afternoon and playoff games from 1970 through the 1997 season.
since 1990, select afc playoffs games have been seen on abc or espn.
animal farm is an allegorical novella by george orwell, first published in england on 17 august 1945.
according to orwell, the fable reflects events leading up to the russian revolution of 1917 and then on into the stalinist era of the soviet union.
the soviet union had become a brutal dictatorship built upon a cult of personality and enforced by a reign of terror.
other titular variations include subtitles like "a satire" and "a contemporary satire".
orwell suggested the title ' for the french translation, which abbreviates to ursa, the latin word for "bear", a symbol of russia.
it also played on the french name of the soviet union, '.
the manuscript was initially rejected by a number of british and american publishers, including one of orwell's own, victor gollancz, which delayed its publication.
it became a great commercial success when it did appear partly because international relations were transformed as the wartime alliance gave way to the cold war.
it won a retrospective hugo award in 1996 and is included in the great books of the western world selection.
they adopt the seven commandments of animalism, the most important of which is, "all animals are equal".
the decree is painted in large letters on one side of the barn.
snowball teaches the animals to read and write, while napoleon educates young puppies on the principles of animalism.
food is plentiful, and the farm runs smoothly.
the pigs elevate themselves to positions of leadership and set aside special food items, ostensibly for their personal health.
napoleon disputes this idea, and matters come to head, which culminate in napoleon's dogs chasing snowball away and napoleon declaring himself supreme commander.
napoleon enacts changes to the governance structure of the farm, replacing meetings with a committee of pigs who will run the farm.
through a young pig named squealer, napoleon claims credit for the windmill idea, claiming that snowball was only trying to win animals to his side.
the animals work harder with the promise of easier lives with the windmill.
mr. frederick, a neighbouring farmer, attacks the farm, using blasting powder to blow up the restored windmill.
although the animals win the battle, they do so at great cost, as many, including boxer the workhorse, are wounded.
although he recovers from this, boxer eventually collapses while working on the windmill (being almost 12 years old at that point).
squealer subsequently reports boxer's death and honours him with a festival the following day.
years pass, the windmill is rebuilt, and another windmill is constructed, which makes the farm a good amount of income.
in addition to boxer, many of the animals who participated in the rebellion are dead or old.
mr. jones, having moved away after giving up on reclaiming his farm, has also died.
the pigs start to resemble humans, as they walk upright, carry whips, drink alcohol, and wear clothes.
napoleon holds a dinner party for the pigs and local farmers, with whom he celebrates a new alliance.
he abolishes the practice of the revolutionary traditions and restores the name "the manor farm".
the men and pigs start playing cards, flattering and praising each other while cheating at the game.
when the animals outside look at the pigs and men, they can no longer distinguish between the two.
in these kinds of works, orwell distinctly references the disarray and traumatic conditions of europe following the second world war.
orwell's style and writing philosophy as a whole was very concerned with the pursuit of truth in writing.
orwell was committed to communicating in a way that was straightforward, given the way that he felt words were commonly used in politics to deceive and confuse.
for this reason, he is careful, in "animal farm", to make sure the narrator speaks in an unbiased and uncomplicated fashion.
this style reflects orwell's close proximation to the issues facing europe at the time and his determination to comment critically on stalin's soviet russia.
this motivated orwell to expose and strongly condemn what he saw as the stalinist corruption of the original socialist ideals.
immediately prior to writing the book, orwell had quit the bbc.
he was also upset about a booklet for propagandists the ministry of information had put out.
four publishers refused to publish "animal farm", yet one had initially accepted the work, but declined it after consulting the ministry of information.
eventually, secker and warburg published the first edition in 1945.
anti-russian books do appear, but mostly from catholic publishing firms and always from a religious or frankly reactionary angle."
such flagrant anti-soviet bias was unacceptable, and the choice of pigs as the dominant class was thought to be especially offensive.
it may reasonably be assumed that the "important official" was a man named peter smollett, who was later unmasked as a soviet agent.
in october 1945, orwell wrote to frederic warburg expressing interest in pursuing the possibility that the political cartoonist david low might illustrate "animal farm".
secker and warburg published the first edition of "animal farm" in 1945 without an introduction.
however, the publisher had provided space for a preface in the author's proof composited from the manuscript.
for reasons unknown, no preface was supplied, and the page numbers had to be renumbered at the last minute.
orwell's essay criticised british self-censorship by the press, specifically the suppression of unflattering descriptions of stalin and the soviet government.
other publishers were still declining to publish it.
contemporary reviews of the work were not universally positive.
writing in the american "new republic" magazine, george soule expressed his disappointment in the book, writing that it "puzzled and saddened me.
it seemed on the whole dull.
the allegory turned out to be a creaking machine for saying in a clumsy way things that have been said better directly."
"animal farm" has been subject to much comment in the decades since these early remarks.
it won a retrospective hugo award in 1996 and is included in the great books of the western world selection.
in the same manner, "animal farm" has also faced relatively recent issues in china.
in 2018, the government made the decision to censor all online posts about or referring to "animal farm".
however the book itself, as of 2019, remains sold in stores.
the original commandments are: these commandments are also distilled into the maxim "four legs good, two legs bad!"
which is primarily used by the sheep on the farm, often to disrupt discussions and disagreements between animals on the nature of animalism.
later, napoleon and his pigs secretly revise some commandments to clear themselves of accusations of law-breaking.
through the revision of the commandments, orwell demonstrates how simply political dogma can be turned into malleable propaganda.
orwell biographer jeffrey meyers has written, "virtually every detail has political significance in this allegory."
the revolt of the animals against farmer jones is orwell's analogy with the october 1917 bolshevik revolution.
these contributed to orwell's conviction that the bolshevik revolution had been corrupted and the soviet system become rotten.
during the battle, orwell first wrote, "all the animals, including napoleon" took cover.
orwell had the publisher alter this to "all the animals except napoleon" in recognition of stalin's decision to remain in moscow during the german advance.
orwell requested the change after he met józef czapski in paris in march 1945.
"animal farm" has been adapted to film twice.
both differ from the novel and have been accused of taking significant liberties, including sanitising some aspects.
in 2012, an hfr-3d version of "animal farm", potentially directed by andy serkis, was announced.
a bbc radio version, produced by rayner heppenstall, was broadcast in january 1947.
orwell listened to the production at his home in canonbury square, london, with hugh gordon porteous, amongst others.
orwell later wrote to heppenstall that porteous, "who had not read the book, grasped what was happening after a few minutes."
a further radio production, again using orwell's own dramatisation of the book, was broadcast in january 2013 on bbc radio 4.
tamsin greig narrated, and the cast included nicky henson as napoleon, toby jones as the propagandist squealer, and ralph ineson as boxer.
it toured nine cities in 1985.
a solo version, adapted and performed by guy masterson, premièred at the traverse theatre edinburgh in january 1995 and has toured worldwide since.
in 1950 norman pett and his writing partner don freeman were secretly hired by the british foreign office to adapt "animal farm" into a comic strip.
this comic was not published in the u.k. but ran in brazilian and burmese newspapers.
amphibians are ectothermic, tetrapod vertebrates of the class amphibia.
all living amphibians belong to the group lissamphibia.
they inhabit a wide variety of habitats, with most species living within terrestrial, fossorial, arboreal or freshwater aquatic ecosystems.
thus amphibians typically start out as larvae living in water, but some species have developed behavioural adaptations to bypass this.
the young generally undergo metamorphosis from larva with gills to an adult air-breathing form with lungs.
amphibians use their skin as a secondary respiratory surface and some small terrestrial salamanders and frogs lack lungs and rely entirely on their skin.
they are superficially similar to lizards but, along with mammals and birds, reptiles are amniotes and do not require water bodies in which to breed.
the earliest amphibians evolved in the devonian period from sarcopterygian fish with lungs and bony-limbed fins, features that were helpful in adapting to dry land.
they diversified and became dominant during the carboniferous and permian periods, but were later displaced by reptiles and other vertebrates.
over time, amphibians shrank in size and decreased in diversity, leaving only the modern subclass lissamphibia.
the three modern orders of amphibians are anura (the frogs and toads), urodela (the salamanders), and apoda (the caecilians).
the number of known amphibian species is approximately 8,000, of which nearly 90% are frogs.
the smallest amphibian (and vertebrate) in the world is a frog from new guinea ("paedophryne amauensis") with a length of just .
the study of amphibians is called batrachology, while the study of both reptiles and amphibians is called herpetology.
the term was initially used as a general adjective for animals that could live on land or in water, including seals and otters.
traditionally, the class amphibia includes all tetrapod vertebrates that are not amniotes.
with the phylogenetic classification, the taxon labyrinthodontia has been discarded as it is a polyparaphyletic group without unique defining features apart from shared primitive characteristics.
classification varies according to the preferred phylogeny of the author and whether they use a stem-based or a node-based classification.
if the common ancestor of amphibians and amniotes is included in amphibia, it becomes a paraphyletic group.
all modern amphibians are included in the subclass lissamphibia, which is usually considered a clade, a group of species that have evolved from a common ancestor.
it is anatomically very similar to modern frogs.
the oldest known caecilian is another early jurassic species, "eocaecilia micropodia", also from arizona.
the earliest salamander is "beiyanerpeton jianpingensis" from the late jurassic of northeastern china.
authorities disagree as to whether salientia is a superorder that includes the order anura, or whether anura is a sub-order of the order salientia.
the lissamphibia are traditionally divided into three orders, but an extinct salamander-like family, the albanerpetontidae, is now considered part of lissamphibia alongside the superorder salientia.
furthermore, salientia includes all three recent orders plus the triassic proto-frog, "triadobatrachus".
these ancient lobe-finned fish had evolved multi-jointed leg-like fins with digits that enabled them to crawl along the sea bottom.
some fish had developed primitive lungs that help them breathe air when the stagnant pools of the devonian swamps were low in oxygen.
they could also use their strong fins to hoist themselves out of the water and onto dry land if circumstances so required.
despite being able to crawl on land, many of these prehistoric tetrapodomorph fish still spent most of their time in the water.
they had started to develop lungs, but still breathed predominantly with gills.
many examples of species showing transitional features have been discovered.
"ichthyostega" was one of the first primitive amphibians, with nostrils and more efficient lungs.
it had four sturdy limbs, a neck, a tail with fins and a skull very similar to that of the lobe-finned fish, "eusthenopteron".
amphibians evolved adaptations that allowed them to stay out of the water for longer periods.
their lungs improved and their skeletons became heavier and stronger, better able to support the weight of their bodies on land.
they developed "hands" and "feet" with five or more digits; the skin became more capable of retaining body fluids and resisting desiccation.
it is thought they may have propelled themselves with their forelimbs, dragging their hindquarters in a similar manner to that used by the elephant seal.
in the early carboniferous (360 to 345 million years ago), the climate became wet and warm.
extensive swamps developed with mosses, ferns, horsetails and calamites.
air-breathing arthropods evolved and invaded the land where they provided food for the carnivorous amphibians that began to adapt to the terrestrial environment.
though equipped with limbs and the ability to breathe air, most still had a long tapering body and strong tail.
after the carboniferous rainforest collapse amphibian dominance gave way to reptiles, and amphibians were further devastated by the permian–triassic extinction event.
the origins and evolutionary relationships between the three main groups of amphibians is a matter of debate.
a 2005 molecular phylogeny, based on rdna analysis, suggests that salamanders and caecilians are more closely related to each other than they are to frogs.
the briefness of this period, and the swiftness with which radiation took place, would help account for the relative scarcity of primitive amphibian fossils.
molecular analysis suggests that the frog–salamander divergence took place considerably earlier than the palaeontological evidence indicates.
newer research indicates that the common ancestor of all lissamphibians lived about 315 million years ago, and that stereospondyls are the closest relatives to the caecilians.
as they evolved from lunged fish, amphibians had to make certain adaptations for living on land, including the need to develop new means of locomotion.
in the water, the sideways thrusts of their tails had propelled them forward, but on land, quite different mechanisms were required.
their vertebral columns, limbs, limb girdles and musculature needed to be strong enough to raise them off the ground for locomotion and feeding.
terrestrial adults discarded their lateral line systems and adapted their sensory systems to receive stimuli via the medium of the air.
they needed to develop new methods to regulate their body heat to cope with fluctuations in ambient temperature.
they developed behaviours suitable for reproduction in a terrestrial environment.
their skins were exposed to harmful ultraviolet rays that had previously been absorbed by the water.
the skin changed to become more protective and prevent excessive water loss.
the superclass tetrapoda is divided into four classes of vertebrate animals with four limbs.
lacking these membranes, amphibians require water bodies for reproduction, although some species have developed various strategies for protecting or bypassing the vulnerable aquatic larval stage.
on land, amphibians are restricted to moist habitats because of the need to keep their skin damp.
(the largest species of salamanders don't go through a metamorphosis.)
amphibians that lay eggs on land often go through the whole metamorphosis inside the egg.
an anamniotic terrestrial egg is less than 1 cm in diameter due to diffusion problems, a size which puts a limit on the amount of posthatching growth.
the smallest amphibian (and vertebrate) in the world is a microhylid frog from new guinea ("paedophryne amauensis") first discovered in 2012.
it has an average length of and is part of a genus that contains four of the world's ten smallest frog species.
the largest frog is the african goliath frog ("conraua goliath"), which can reach and weigh .
amphibians are ectothermic (cold-blooded) vertebrates that do not maintain their body temperature through internal physiological processes.
their metabolic rate is low and as a result, their food and energy requirements are limited.
in the adult state, they have tear ducts and movable eyelids, and most species have ears that can detect airborne or ground vibrations.
they have muscular tongues, which in many species can be protruded.
modern amphibians have fully ossified vertebrae with articular processes.
their ribs are usually short and may be fused to the vertebrae.
their skulls are mostly broad and short, and are often incompletely ossified.
their skin contains little keratin and lacks scales, apart from a few fish-like scales in certain caecilians.
the skin contains many mucous glands and in some species, poison glands (a type of granular gland).
the hearts of amphibians have three chambers, two atria and one ventricle.
they have a urinary bladder and nitrogenous waste products are excreted primarily as urea.
most amphibians lay their eggs in water and have aquatic larvae that undergo metamorphosis to become terrestrial adults.
amphibians breathe by means of a pump action in which air is first drawn into the buccopharyngeal region through the nostrils.
these are then closed and the air is forced into the lungs by contraction of the throat.
they supplement this with gas exchange through the skin.
members of this order with smooth skins are commonly referred to as frogs, while those with warty skins are known as toads.
the difference is not a formal one taxonomically and there are numerous exceptions to this rule.
members of the family bufonidae are known as the "true toads".
although most species are associated with water and damp habitats, some are specialised to live in trees or in deserts.
they are found worldwide except for polar areas.
anura is divided into three suborders that are broadly accepted by the scientific community, but the relationships between some families remain unclear.
future molecular studies should provide further insights into their evolutionary relationships.
the suborder archaeobatrachia contains four families of primitive frogs.
these are ascaphidae, bombinatoridae, discoglossidae and leiopelmatidae which have few derived features and are probably paraphyletic with regard to other frog lineages.
the six families in the more evolutionarily advanced suborder mesobatrachia are the fossorial megophryidae, pelobatidae, pelodytidae, scaphiopodidae and rhinophrynidae and the obligatorily aquatic pipidae.
these have certain characteristics that are intermediate between the two other suborders.
neobatrachia is by far the largest suborder and includes the remaining families of modern frogs, including most common species.
ninety-six percent of the over 5,000 extant species of frog are neobatrachians.
the order caudata (from the latin "cauda" meaning "tail") consists of the salamanders—elongated, low-slung animals that mostly resemble lizards in form.
this is a symplesiomorphic trait and they are no more closely related to lizards than they are to mammals.
salamanders lack claws, have scale-free skins, either smooth or covered with tubercles, and tails that are usually flattened from side to side and often finned.
salamanders have a mostly laurasian distribution, being present in much of the holarctic region of the northern hemisphere.
urodela is a name sometimes used for all the extant species of salamanders.
members of several salamander families have become paedomorphic and either fail to complete their metamorphosis or retain some larval characteristics as adults.
most salamanders are under long.
they may be terrestrial or aquatic and many spend part of the year in each habitat.
the suborder cryptobranchoidea contains the primitive salamanders.
these large amphibians retain several larval characteristics in their adult state; gills slits are present and the eyes are unlidded.
a unique feature is their ability to feed by suction, depressing either the left side of their lower jaw or the right.
the males excavate nests, persuade females to lay their egg strings inside them, and guard them.
as well as breathing with lungs, they respire through the many folds in their thin skin, which has capillaries close to the surface.
the suborder salamandroidea contains the advanced salamanders.
they differ from the cryptobranchids by having fused prearticular bones in the lower jaw, and by using internal fertilisation.
the largest family in this group is plethodontidae, the lungless salamanders, which includes 60% of all salamander species.
the family salamandridae includes the true salamanders and the name "newt" is given to members of its subfamily pleurodelinae.
the third suborder, sirenoidea, contains the four species of sirens, which are in a single family, sirenidae.
members of this order are eel-like aquatic salamanders with much reduced forelimbs and no hind limbs.
some of their features are primitive while others are derived.
fertilisation is likely to be external as sirenids lack the cloacal glands used by male salamandrids to produce spermatophores and the females lack spermathecae for sperm storage.
despite this, the eggs are laid singly, a behaviour not conducive for external fertilisation.
the order gymnophiona (from the greek "gymnos" meaning "naked" and "ophis" meaning "serpent") or apoda comprises the caecilians.
these are long, cylindrical, limbless animals with a snake- or worm-like form.
a caecilian's skin has a large number of transverse folds and in some species contains tiny embedded dermal scales.
it has rudimentary eyes covered in skin, which are probably limited to discerning differences in light intensity.
it also has a pair of short tentacles near the eye that can be extended and which have tactile and olfactory functions.
most caecilians live underground in burrows in damp soil, in rotten wood and under plant debris, but some are aquatic.
most species lay their eggs underground and when the larvae hatch, they make their way to adjacent bodies of water.
others brood their eggs and the larvae undergo metamorphosis before the eggs hatch.
a few species give birth to live young, nourishing them with glandular secretions while they are in the oviduct.
caecilians have a mostly gondwanan distribution, being found in tropical regions of africa, asia and central and south america.
local thickenings (often called warts) are common, such as those found on toads.
the outside of the skin is shed periodically mostly in one piece, in contrast to mammals and birds where it is shed in flakes.
amphibians often eat the sloughed skin.
caecilians are unique among amphibians in having mineralized dermal scales embedded in the dermis between the furrows in the skin.
the similarity of these to the scales of bony fish is largely superficial.
amphibian skin is permeable to water.
to compensate for their thin and delicate skin, amphibians have evolved mucous glands, principally on their heads, backs and tails.
the secretions produced by these help keep the skin moist.
in addition, most species of amphibian have granular glands that secrete distasteful or poisonous substances.
some amphibian toxins can be lethal to humans while others have little effect.
the skin colour of amphibians is produced by three layers of pigment cells called chromatophores.
the colour change displayed by many species is initiated by hormones secreted by the pituitary gland.
a vividly coloured skin usually indicates that the species is toxic and is a warning sign to predators.
amphibians have a skeletal system that is structurally homologous to other tetrapods, though with a number of variations.
they all have four limbs except for the legless caecilians and a few species of salamander with reduced or no limbs.
the bones are hollow and lightweight.
the musculoskeletal system is strong to enable it to support the head and body.
the bones are fully ossified and the vertebrae interlock with each other by means of overlapping processes.
the pectoral girdle is supported by muscle, and the well-developed pelvic girdle is attached to the backbone by a pair of sacral ribs.
the ilium slopes forward and the body is held closer to the ground than is the case in mammals.
in most amphibians, there are four digits on the fore foot and five on the hind foot, but no claws on either.
some salamanders have fewer digits and the amphiumas are eel-like in appearance with tiny, stubby legs.
the sirens are aquatic salamanders with stumpy forelimbs and no hind limbs.
the caecilians are limbless.
they burrow in the manner of earthworms with zones of muscle contractions moving along the body.
on the surface of the ground or in water they move by undulating their body from side to side.
in frogs, the hind legs are larger than the fore legs, especially so in those species that principally move by jumping or swimming.
in the walkers and runners the hind limbs are not so large, and the burrowers mostly have short limbs and broad bodies.
in most salamanders, the limbs are short and more or less the same length and project at right angles from the body.
locomotion on land is by walking and the tail often swings from side to side or is used as a prop, particularly when climbing.
in their normal gait, only one leg is advanced at a time in the manner adopted by their ancestors, the lobe-finned fish.
some salamanders in the genus "aneides" and certain plethodontids climb trees and have long limbs, large toepads and prehensile tails.
in aquatic salamanders and in frog tadpoles, the tail has dorsal and ventral fins and is moved from side to side as a means of propulsion.
adult frogs do not have tails and caecilians have only very short ones.
salamanders use their tails in defence and some are prepared to jettison them to save their lives in a process known as autotomy.
certain species in the plethodontidae have a weak zone at the base of the tail and use this strategy readily.
the tail often continues to twitch after separation which may distract the attacker and allow the salamander to escape.
both tails and limbs can be regenerated.
adult frogs are unable to regrow limbs but tadpoles can do so.
amphibians have a juvenile stage and an adult stage, and the circulatory systems of the two are distinct.
in the adult stage, amphibians (especially frogs) lose their gills and develop lungs.
they have a heart that consists of a single ventricle and two atria.
when the ventricle starts contracting, deoxygenated blood is pumped through the pulmonary artery to the lungs.
continued contraction then pumps oxygenated blood around the rest of the body.
mixing of the two bloodstreams is minimized by the anatomy of the chambers.
the nervous system is basically the same as in other vertebrates, with a central brain, a spinal cord, and nerves throughout the body.
the amphibian brain is less well developed than that of reptiles, birds and mammals but is similar in morphology and function to that of a fish.
it is believed amphibians are capable of perceiving pain.
the brain consists of equal parts, cerebrum, midbrain and cerebellum.
the cerebellum is the center of muscular coordination and the medulla oblongata controls some organ functions including heartbeat and respiration.
the brain sends signals through the spinal cord and nerves to regulate activity in the rest of the body.
the pineal body, known to regulate sleep patterns in humans, is thought to produce the hormones involved in hibernation and aestivation in amphibians.
tadpoles retain the lateral line system of their ancestral fishes, but this is lost in terrestrial adult amphibians.
some caecilians possess electroreceptors that allow them to locate objects around them when submerged in water.
the ears are well developed in frogs.
there is no external ear, but the large circular eardrum lies on the surface of the head just behind the eye.
this vibrates and sound is transmitted through a single bone, the stapes, to the inner ear.
only high-frequency sounds like mating calls are heard in this way, but low-frequency noises can be detected through another mechanism.
there is a patch of specialized haircells, called "papilla amphibiorum", in the inner ear capable of detecting deeper sounds.
the ears of salamanders and caecilians are less highly developed than those of frogs as they do not normally communicate with each other through the medium of sound.
the adult eyes are an improvement on invertebrate eyes and were a first step in the development of more advanced vertebrate eyes.
they allow colour vision and depth of focus.
in the retinas are green rods, which are receptive to a wide range of wavelengths.
some use inertial feeding to help them swallow the prey, repeatedly thrusting their head forward sharply causing the food to move backwards in their mouth by inertia.
most amphibians swallow their prey whole without much chewing so they possess voluminous stomachs.
the enzyme chitinase produced in the stomach helps digest the chitinous cuticle of arthropod prey.
amphibians possess a pancreas, liver and gall bladder.
the liver is usually large with two lobes.
there are two kidneys located dorsally, near the roof of the body cavity.
some tree frogs with limited access to water excrete most of their metabolic waste as uric acid.
ventilation is accomplished by buccal pumping.
most amphibians, however, are able to exchange gases with the water or air via their skin.
to enable sufficient cutaneous respiration, the surface of their highly vascularised skin must remain moist to allow the oxygen to diffuse at a sufficiently high rate.
many aquatic salamanders and all tadpoles have gills in their larval stage, with some (such as the axolotl) retaining gills as aquatic adults.
for the purpose of reproduction most amphibians require fresh water although some lay their eggs on land and have developed various means of keeping them moist.
a few (e.g.
"fejervarya raja") can inhabit brackish water, but there are no true marine amphibians.
there are reports, however, of particular amphibian populations unexpectedly invading marine waters.
such was the case with the black sea invasion of the natural hybrid "pelophylax esculentus" reported in 2010.
they reproduce via direct development, an ecological and evolutionary adaptation that has allowed them to be completely independent from free-standing water.
reproductive success of many amphibians is dependent not only on the quantity of rainfall, but the seasonal timing.
in the tropics, many amphibians breed continuously or at any time of year.
in temperate regions, breeding is mostly seasonal, usually in the spring, and is triggered by increasing day length, rising temperatures or rainfall.
experiments have shown the importance of temperature, but the trigger event, especially in arid regions, is often a storm.
in caecilians, fertilisation is internal, the male extruding an intromittent organ, the , and inserting it into the female cloaca.
the paired müllerian glands inside the male cloaca secrete a fluid which resembles that produced by mammalian prostate glands and which may transport and nourish the sperm.
fertilisation probably takes place in the oviduct.
the majority of salamanders also engage in internal fertilisation.
the female takes up the sperm packet by grasping it with the lips of the cloaca and pushing it into the vent.
the spermatozoa move to the spermatheca in the roof of the cloaca where they remain until ovulation which may be many months later.
courtship rituals and methods of transfer of the spermatophore vary between species.
with a few exceptions, frogs use external fertilisation.
they remain in amplexus with their cloacae positioned close together while the female lays the eggs and the male covers them with sperm.
roughened nuptial pads on the male's hands aid in retaining grip.
often the male collects and retains the egg mass, forming a sort of basket with the hind feet.
the tailed frog ("ascaphus truei") exhibits internal fertilisation.
the "tail" is only possessed by the male and is an extension of the cloaca and used to inseminate the female.
this frog lives in fast-flowing streams and internal fertilisation prevents the sperm from being washed away before fertilisation occurs.
the sperm may be retained in storage tubes attached to the oviduct until the following spring.
most frogs can be classified as either prolonged or explosive breeders.
typically, prolonged breeders congregate at a breeding site, the males usually arriving first, calling and setting up territories.
other satellite males remain quietly nearby, waiting for their opportunity to take over a territory.
the females arrive sporadically, mate selection takes place and eggs are laid.
the females depart and territories may change hands.
more females appear and in due course, the breeding season comes to an end.
explosive breeders on the other hand are found where temporary pools appear in dry regions after rainfall.
these frogs are typically fossorial species that emerge after heavy rains and congregate at a breeding site.
the assembled frogs may call in unison and frenzied activity ensues, the males scrambling to mate with the usually smaller number of females.
some species store sperm through long breeding seasons, as the extra time may allow for interactions with rival sperm.
most amphibians go through metamorphosis, a process of significant morphological change after birth.
in typical amphibian development, eggs are laid in water and larvae are adapted to an aquatic lifestyle.
frogs, toads and salamanders all hatch from the egg as larvae with external gills.
metamorphosis in amphibians is regulated by thyroxine concentration in the blood, which stimulates metamorphosis, and prolactin, which counteracts thyroxine's effect.
specific events are dependent on threshold values for different tissues.
because most embryonic development is outside the parental body, it is subject to many adaptations due to specific environmental circumstances.
for this reason tadpoles can have horny ridges instead of teeth, whisker-like skin extensions or fins.
they also make use of a sensory lateral line organ similar to that of fish.
after metamorphosis, these organs become redundant and will be reabsorbed by controlled cell death, called apoptosis.
the variety of adaptations to specific environmental circumstances among amphibians is wide, with many discoveries still being made.
the egg of an amphibian is typically surrounded by a transparent gelatinous covering secreted by the oviducts and containing mucoproteins and mucopolysaccharides.
this capsule is permeable to water and gases, and swells considerably as it absorbs water.
the ovum is at first rigidly held, but in fertilised eggs the innermost layer liquefies and allows the embryo to move freely.
this also happens in salamander eggs, even when they are unfertilised.
eggs of some salamanders and frogs contain unicellular green algae.
these penetrate the jelly envelope after the eggs are laid and may increase the supply of oxygen to the embryo through photosynthesis.
they seem to both speed up the development of the larvae and reduce mortality.
most eggs contain the pigment melanin which raises their temperature through the absorption of light and also protects them against ultraviolet radiation.
caecilians, some plethodontid salamanders and certain frogs lay eggs underground that are unpigmented.
the eggs may be deposited singly or in small groups, or may take the form of spherical egg masses, rafts or long strings.
in terrestrial caecilians, the eggs are laid in grape-like clusters in burrows near streams.
the amphibious salamander "ensatina" attaches its similar clusters by stalks to underwater stems and roots.
the tungara frog ("physalaemus pustulosus") builds a floating nest from foam to protect its eggs.
first a raft is built, then eggs are laid in the centre, and finally a foam cap is overlaid.
the foam has anti-microbial properties.
it contains no detergents but is created by whipping up proteins and lectins secreted by the female.
many caecilians and some other amphibians lay their eggs on land, and the newly hatched larvae wriggle or are transported to water bodies.
some caecilians, the alpine salamander ("salamandra atra") and some of the african live-bearing toads ("nectophrynoides spp.")
are viviparous.
their larvae feed on glandular secretions and develop within the female's oviduct, often for long periods.
other amphibians, but not caecilians, are ovoviviparous.
the larvae emerge at varying stages of their growth, either before or after metamorphosis, according to their species.
the toad genus "nectophrynoides" exhibits all of these developmental patterns among its dozen or so members.
frog larvae are known as tadpoles and typically have oval bodies and long, vertically flattened tails with fins.
newly hatched tadpoles soon develop gill pouches that cover the gills.
the lungs develop early and are used as accessory breathing organs, the tadpoles rising to the water surface to gulp air.
some species complete their development inside the egg and hatch directly into small frogs.
these larvae do not have gills but instead have specialised areas of skin through which respiration takes place.
front legs are formed under the gill sac and hind legs become visible a few days later.
in fact, tadpoles developing in ponds and streams are typically herbivorous.
they also feed on diatoms, filtered from the water through the gills, and stir up the sediment at bottom of the pond, ingesting edible fragments.
they have a relatively long, spiral-shaped gut to enable them to digest this diet.
some species are carnivorous at the tadpole stage, eating insects, smaller tadpoles and fish.
at metamorphosis, rapid changes in the body take place as the lifestyle of the frog changes completely.
the spiral‐shaped mouth with horny tooth ridges is reabsorbed together with the spiral gut.
the animal develops a large jaw, and its gills disappear along with its gill sac.
eyes and legs grow quickly, and a tongue is formed.
there are associated changes in the neural networks such as development of stereoscopic vision and loss of the lateral line system.
all this can happen in about a day.
a few days later, the tail is reabsorbed, due to the higher thyroxine concentration required for this to take place.
the forelimbs may be partially developed and the hind limbs are rudimentary in pond-living species but may be rather more developed in species that reproduce in moving water.
pond-type larvae often have a pair of balancers, rod-like structures on either side of the head that may prevent the gills from becoming clogged up with sediment.
both of these are able to breed.
other factors that may inhibit metamorphosis include lack of food, lack of trace elements and competition from conspecifics.
the tiger salamander ("ambystoma tigrinum") also sometimes behaves in this way and may grow particularly large in the process.
the adult tiger salamander is terrestrial, but the larva is aquatic and able to breed while still in the larval state.
when conditions are particularly inhospitable on land, larval breeding may allow continuation of a population that would otherwise die out.
lungless salamanders in the family plethodontidae are terrestrial and lay a small number of unpigmented eggs in a cluster among damp leaf litter.
each egg has a large yolk sac and the larva feeds on this while it develops inside the egg, emerging fully formed as a juvenile salamander.
the female salamander often broods the eggs.
in newts and salamanders, metamorphosis is less dramatic than in frogs.
this is because the larvae are already carnivorous and continue to feed as predators when they are adults so few changes are needed to their digestive systems.
their lungs are functional early, but the larvae do not make as much use of them as do tadpoles.
their gills are never covered by gill sacs and are reabsorbed just before the animals leave the water.
salamanders are at their most vulnerable at metamorphosis as swimming speeds are reduced and transforming tails are encumbrances on land.
adult salamanders often have an aquatic phase in spring and summer, and a land phase in winter.
for adaptation to a water phase, prolactin is the required hormone, and for adaptation to the land phase, thyroxine.
external gills do not return in subsequent aquatic phases because these are completely absorbed upon leaving the water for the first time.
most terrestrial caecilians that lay eggs do so in burrows or moist places on land near bodies of water.
the development of the young of "ichthyophis glutinosus", a species from sri lanka, has been much studied.
the eel-like larvae hatch out of the eggs and make their way to water.
they have three pairs of external red feathery gills, a blunt head with two rudimentary eyes, a lateral line system and a short tail with fins.
they swim by undulating their body from side to side.
they are mostly active at night, soon lose their gills and make sorties onto land.
metamorphosis is gradual.
the skin thickens, embedded scales develop and the body divides into segments.
by this time, the caecilian has constructed a burrow and is living on land.
in the majority of species of caecilians, the young are produced by viviparity.
"typhlonectes compressicauda", a species from south america, is typical of these.
up to nine larvae can develop in the oviduct at any one time.
they are elongated and have paired sac-like gills, small eyes and specialised scraping teeth.
this stimulates the secretion of fluids rich in lipids and mucoproteins on which they feed along with scrapings from the oviduct wall.
they may increase their length sixfold and be two-fifths as long as their mother before being born.
by this time they have undergone metamorphosis, lost their eyes and gills, developed a thicker skin and mouth tentacles, and reabsorbed their teeth.
a permanent set of teeth grow through soon after birth.
the ringed caecilian ("siphonops annulatus") has developed a unique adaptation for the purposes of reproduction.
the progeny feed on a skin layer that is specially developed by the adult in a phenomenon known as maternal dermatophagy.
the brood feed as a batch for about seven minutes at intervals of approximately three days which gives the skin an opportunity to regenerate.
meanwhile, they have been observed to ingest fluid exuded from the maternal cloaca.
nevertheless, it is estimated that in up to 20% of amphibian species, one or both adults play some role in the care of the young.
those species that breed in smaller water bodies or other specialised habitats tend to have complex patterns of behaviour in the care of their young.
many woodland salamanders lay clutches of eggs under dead logs or stones on land.
when fully developed, they break their way out of the egg capsules and disperse as juvenile salamanders.
the male hellbender, a primitive salamander, excavates an underwater nest and encourages females to lay there.
the male "colostethus subpunctatus", a tiny frog, protects the egg cluster which is hidden under a stone or log.
the male midwife toad ("alytes obstetricans") winds egg strings round his thighs and carries the eggs around for up to eight weeks.
he keeps them moist and when they are ready to hatch, he visits a pond or ditch and releases the tadpoles.
the female gastric-brooding frog ("rheobatrachus spp.")
reared larvae in her stomach after swallowing either the eggs or hatchlings; however, this stage was never observed before the species became extinct.
the tadpoles secrete a hormone that inhibits digestion in the mother whilst they develop by consuming their very large yolk supply.
the pouched frog ("assa darlingtoni") lays eggs on the ground.
when they hatch, the male carries the tadpoles around in brood pouches on his hind legs.
the aquatic surinam toad ("pipa pipa") raises its young in pores on its back where they remain until metamorphosis.
the granular poison frog ("oophaga granulifera") is typical of a number of tree frogs in the poison dart frog family dendrobatidae.
the female visits the nursery sites regularly and deposits unfertilised eggs in the water and these are consumed by the tadpoles.
with a few exceptions, adult amphibians are predators, feeding on virtually anything that moves that they can swallow.
the diet mostly consists of small prey that do not move too fast such as beetles, caterpillars, earthworms and spiders.
the sirens ("siren spp.")
the mexican burrowing toad ("rhinophrynus dorsalis") has a specially adapted tongue for picking up ants and termites.
it projects it with the tip foremost whereas other frogs flick out the rear part first, their tongues being hinged at the front.
food is mostly selected by sight, even in conditions of dim light.
movement of the prey triggers a feeding response.
toads, salamanders and caecilians also use smell to detect prey.
this response is mostly secondary because salamanders have been observed to remain stationary near odoriferous prey but only feed if it moves.
cave-dwelling amphibians normally hunt by smell.
some salamanders seem to have learned to recognize immobile prey when it has no smell, even in complete darkness.
amphibians usually swallow food whole but may chew it lightly first to subdue it.
they typically have small hinged pedicellate teeth, a feature unique to amphibians.
the base and crown of these are composed of dentine separated by an uncalcified layer and they are replaced at intervals.
salamanders, caecilians and some frogs have one or two rows of teeth in both jaws, but some frogs ("rana spp.")
lack teeth in the lower jaw, and toads ("bufo spp.")
have no teeth.
in many amphibians there are also vomerine teeth attached to a facial bone in the roof of the mouth.
the tiger salamander ("ambystoma tigrinum") is typical of the frogs and salamanders that hide under cover ready to ambush unwary invertebrates.
others amphibians, such as the "bufo spp."
caecilians do not flick their tongues, but catch their prey by grabbing it with their slightly backward-pointing teeth.
the struggles of the prey and further jaw movements work it inwards and the caecilian usually retreats into its burrow.
the subdued prey is gulped down whole.
when they are newly hatched, frog larvae feed on the yolk of the egg.
when this is exhausted some move on to feed on bacteria, algal crusts, detritus and raspings from submerged plants.
others have specialised mouthparts consisting of a horny beak edged by several rows of labial teeth.
they scrape and bite food of many kinds as well as stirring up the bottom sediment, filtering out larger particles with the papillae around their mouths.
some, such as the spadefoot toads, have strong biting jaws and are carnivorous or even cannibalistic.
the calls made by caecilians and salamanders are limited to occasional soft squeaks, grunts or hisses and have not been much studied.
a clicking sound sometimes produced by caecilians may be a means of orientation, as in bats, or a form of communication.
most salamanders are considered voiceless, but the california giant salamander ("dicamptodon ensatus") has vocal cords and can produce a rattling or barking sound.
some species of salamander emit a quiet squeak or yelp if attacked.
frogs are much more vocal, especially during the breeding season when they use their voices to attract mates.
the presence of a particular species in an area may be more easily discerned by its characteristic call than by a fleeting glimpse of the animal itself.
the main vocalisation is the male's loud advertisement call which seeks to both encourage a female to approach and discourage other males from intruding on its territory.
this call is modified to a quieter courtship call on the approach of a female or to a more aggressive version if a male intruder draws near.
calling carries the risk of attracting predators and involves the expenditure of much energy.
when a frog is attacked, a distress or fright call is emitted, often resembling a scream.
the usually nocturnal cuban tree frog ("osteopilus septentrionalis") produces a rain call when there is rainfall during daylight hours.
little is known of the territorial behaviour of caecilians, but some frogs and salamanders defend home ranges.
these are usually feeding, breeding or sheltering sites.
males normally exhibit such behaviour though in some species, females and even juveniles are also involved.
although in many frog species, females are larger than males, this is not the case in most species where males are actively involved in territorial defence.
some of these have specific adaptations such as enlarged teeth for biting or spines on the chest, arms or thumbs.
in salamanders, defence of a territory involves adopting an aggressive posture and if necessary attacking the intruder.
this may involve snapping, chasing and sometimes biting, occasionally causing the loss of a tail.
the behaviour of red back salamanders ("plethodon cinereus") has been much studied.
91% of marked individuals that were later recaptured were within a metre (yard) of their original daytime retreat under a log or rock.
a similar proportion, when moved experimentally a distance of , found their way back to their home base.
the salamanders left odour marks around their territories which averaged in size and were sometimes inhabited by a male and female pair.
these deterred the intrusion of others and delineated the boundaries between neighbouring areas.
much of their behaviour seemed stereotyped and did not involve any actual contact between individuals.
an aggressive posture involved raising the body off the ground and glaring at the opponent who often turned away submissively.
if the intruder persisted, a biting lunge was usually launched at either the tail region or the naso-labial grooves.
in general, a deeper voice represents a heavier and more powerful individual, and this may be sufficient to prevent intrusion by smaller males.
much energy is used in the vocalization and it takes a toll on the territory holder who may be displaced by a fitter rival if he tires.
there is a tendency for males to tolerate the holders of neighbouring territories while vigorously attacking unknown intruders.
holders of territories have a "home advantage" and usually come off better in an encounter between two similar-sized frogs.
if threats are insufficient, chest to chest tussles may take place.
amphibians have soft bodies with thin skins, and lack claws, defensive armour, or spines.
nevertheless, they have evolved various defence mechanisms to keep themselves alive.
the first line of defence in salamanders and frogs is the mucous secretion that they produce.
this keeps their skin moist and makes them slippery and difficult to grip.
the secretion is often sticky and distasteful or toxic.
in some salamanders, the skin is poisonous.
handling the newts does not cause harm, but ingestion of even the most minute amounts of the skin is deadly.
in feeding trials, fish, frogs, reptiles, birds and mammals were all found to be susceptible.
the only predators with some tolerance to the poison are certain populations of common garter snake ("thamnophis sirtalis").
in locations where both snake and salamander co-exist, the snakes have developed immunity through genetic changes and they feed on the amphibians with impunity.
coevolution occurs with the newt increasing its toxic capabilities at the same rate as the snake further develops its immunity.
some frogs and toads are toxic, the main poison glands being at the side of the neck and under the warts on the back.
these regions are presented to the attacking animal and their secretions may be foul-tasting or cause various physical or neurological symptoms.
altogether, over 200 toxins have been isolated from the limited number of amphibian species that have been investigated.
poisonous species often use bright colouring to warn potential predators of their toxicity.
these warning colours tend to be red or yellow combined with black, with the fire salamander ("salamandra salamandra") being an example.
once a predator has sampled one of these, it is likely to remember the colouration next time it encounters a similar animal.
in some species, such as the fire-bellied toad ("bombina spp.
"), the warning colouration is on the belly and these animals adopt a defensive pose when attacked, exhibiting their bright colours to the predator.
the frog "allobates zaparo" is not poisonous, but mimics the appearance of other toxic species in its locality, a strategy that may deceive predators.
many amphibians are nocturnal and hide during the day, thereby avoiding diurnal predators that hunt by sight.
other amphibians use camouflage to avoid being detected.
they have various colourings such as mottled browns, greys and olives to blend into the background.
some salamanders adopt defensive poses when faced by a potential predator such as the north american northern short-tailed shrew ("blarina brevicauda").
their bodies writhe and they raise and lash their tails which makes it difficult for the predator to avoid contact with their poison-producing granular glands.
a few salamanders will autotomise their tails when attacked, sacrificing this part of their anatomy to enable them to escape.
the tail may have a constriction at its base to allow it to be easily detached.
the tail is regenerated later, but the energy cost to the animal of replacing it is significant.
in amphibians, there is evidence of habituation, associative learning through both classical and instrumental learning, and discrimination abilities.
in one experiment, when offered live fruit flies ("drosophila virilis"), salamanders chose the larger of 1 vs 2 and 2 vs 3.
this is irrespective of other characteristics, i.e.
surface area, volume, weight and movement, although discrimination among large numbers may be based on surface area.
in 2006 there were believed to be 4,035 species of amphibians that depended on water at some stage during their life cycle.
however, many of the causes of amphibian declines are still poorly understood, and are a topic of ongoing discussion.
with their complex reproductive needs and permeable skins, amphibians are often considered to be ecological indicators.
in many terrestrial ecosystems, they constitute one of the largest parts of the vertebrate biomass.
any decline in amphibian numbers will affect the patterns of predation.
the loss of carnivorous species near the top of the food chain will upset the delicate ecosystem balance and may cause dramatic increases in opportunistic species.
in the middle east, a growing appetite for eating frog legs and the consequent gathering of them for food was linked to an increase in mosquitoes.
predators that feed on amphibians are affected by their decline.
if the snake were to become scarce, this would affect birds of prey and other predators that feed on it.
meanwhile, in the ponds and lakes, fewer frogs means fewer tadpoles.
these normally play an important role in controlling the growth of algae and also forage on detritus that accumulates as sediment on the bottom.
aquatic invertebrates and fish might then die and there would be unpredictable ecological consequences.
a global strategy to stem the crisis was released in 2005 in the form of the amphibian conservation action plan.
the amphibian specialist group of the iucn is spearheading efforts to implement a comprehensive global strategy for amphibian conservation.
to the north are the chukchi and beaufort seas of the arctic ocean, while the pacific ocean lies to the south and southwest.
alaska is the largest u.s. state by area and the seventh-largest subnational division in the world.
approximately half of alaska's residents live within the anchorage metropolitan area.
the state capital of juneau is the second-largest city in the united states by area, comprising more territory than the states of rhode island and delaware.
alaska was occupied by various indigenous peoples for thousands of years before the arrival of europeans.
the state is considered the entry point for the settlement of north america by way of the bering land bridge.
the russians were the first europeans to settle the area beginning in the 18th century, eventually establishing russian america, which spanned most of the current state.
the area went through several administrative changes before becoming organized as a territory on may 11, 1912.
it was admitted as the 49th state of the u.s. on january 3, 1959.
alaska's indigenous population is proportionally the highest of any u.s. state, at over 15 percent.
close to two dozen native languages are spoken, and alaskan natives exercise considerable influence in local and state politics.
the name "alaska" () was introduced in the russian colonial period when it was used to refer to the alaska peninsula.
it was derived from an aleut-language idiom, which figuratively refers to the mainland.
literally, it means "object to which the action of the sea is directed".
alaska is the only non-contiguous u.s. state on continental north america; about of british columbia (canada) separates alaska from washington.
alaska's territorial waters touch russia's territorial waters in the bering strait, as the russian big diomede island and alaskan little diomede island are only apart.
alaska has a longer coastline than all the other u.s. states combined.
alaska is the seventh largest sub-national division in the world, and if it was an independent nation would be the 19th largest country in the world.
also referred to as the panhandle or inside passage, this is the region of alaska closest to the rest of the united states.
as such, this was where most of the initial non-indigenous settlement occurred in the years following the alaska purchase.
the region is dominated by the alexander archipelago as well as the tongass national forest, the largest national forest in the united states.
it contains the state capital juneau, the former capital sitka, and ketchikan, at one time alaska's largest city.
the interior is the largest region of alaska; much of it is uninhabited wilderness.
fairbanks is the only large city in the region.
denali national park and preserve is located here.
"denali" is the highest mountain in north america.
southwest alaska is a sparsely inhabited region stretching some inland from the bering sea.
most of the population lives along the coast.
kodiak island is also located in southwest.
the massive yukon–kuskokwim delta, one of the largest river deltas in the world, is here.
portions of the alaska peninsula are considered part of southwest, with the remaining portions included with the aleutian islands (see below).
the north slope is mostly tundra peppered with small villages.
the area is known for its massive reserves of crude oil, and contains both the national petroleum reserve–alaska and the prudhoe bay oil field.
the city of utqiagvik, formerly known as barrow, is the northernmost city in the united states and is located here.
the northwest arctic area, anchored by kotzebue and also containing the kobuk river valley, is often regarded as being part of this region.
however, the respective inupiat of the north slope and of the northwest arctic seldom consider themselves to be one people.
more than 300 small volcanic islands make up this chain, which stretches more than into the pacific ocean.
two of the islands, attu and kiska, were occupied by japanese forces during world war ii.
with its myriad islands, alaska has nearly of tidal shoreline.
the aleutian islands chain extends west from the southern tip of the alaska peninsula.
many active volcanoes are found in the aleutians and in coastal regions.
unimak island, for example, is home to mount shishaldin, which is an occasionally smoldering volcano that rises to above the north pacific.
it is the most perfect volcanic cone on earth, even more symmetrical than japan's mount fuji.
the chain of volcanoes extends to mount spurr, west of anchorage on the mainland.
one of the world's largest tides occurs in turnagain arm, just south of anchorage, where tidal differences can be more than .
alaska has more than three million lakes.
marshlands and wetland permafrost cover (mostly in northern, western and southwest flatlands).
glacier ice covers about of alaska.
the bering glacier is the largest glacier in north america, covering alone.
of these, the bureau of land management manages , or 23.8% of the state.
the arctic national wildlife refuge is managed by the united states fish and wildlife service.
it is the world's largest wildlife refuge, comprising .
of the remaining land area, the state of alaska owns , its entitlement under the alaska statehood act.
a portion of that acreage is occasionally ceded to organized boroughs, under the statutory provisions pertaining to newly formed boroughs.
smaller portions are set aside for rural subdivisions and other homesteading-related opportunities.
these are not very popular due to the often remote and roadless locations.
the university of alaska, as a land grant university, also owns substantial acreage which it manages independently.
another are owned by 12 regional, and scores of local, native corporations created under the alaska native claims settlement act (ancsa) of 1971.
regional native corporation doyon, limited often promotes itself as the largest private landowner in alaska in advertisements and other communications.
provisions of ancsa allowing the corporations' land holdings to be sold on the open market starting in 1991 were repealed before they could take effect.
effectively, the corporations hold title (including subsurface title in many cases, a privilege denied to individual alaskans) but cannot sell the land.
individual native allotments can be and are sold on the open market, however.
various private interests own the remaining land, totaling about one percent of the state.
alaska is, by a large margin, the state with the smallest percentage of private land ownership when native corporation holdings are excluded.
on an annual basis, southeast is both the wettest and warmest part of alaska with milder temperatures in the winter and high precipitation throughout the year.
juneau averages over of precipitation a year, and ketchikan averages over .
this is also the only region in alaska in which the average daytime high temperature is above freezing during the winter months.
the climate of anchorage and south central alaska is mild by alaskan standards due to the region's proximity to the seacoast.
while the area gets less rain than southeast alaska, it gets more snow, and days tend to be clearer.
on average, anchorage receives of precipitation a year, with around of snow, although there are areas in the south central which receive far more snow.
it is a subarctic climate () due to its brief, cool summers.
the climate of western alaska is determined in large part by the bering sea and the gulf of alaska.
it is a subarctic oceanic climate in the southwest and a continental subarctic climate farther north.
the temperature is somewhat moderate considering how far north the area is.
this region has a tremendous amount of variety in precipitation.
on the other extreme, some locations between dillingham and bethel average around of precipitation.
the climate of the interior of alaska is subarctic.
some of the highest and lowest temperatures in alaska occur around the area near fairbanks.
the summers may have temperatures reaching into the 90s °f (the low-to-mid 30s °c), while in the winter, the temperature can fall below .
precipitation is sparse in the interior, often less than a year, but what precipitation falls in the winter tends to stay the entire winter.
the highest and lowest recorded temperatures in alaska are both in the interior.
the climate in the extreme north of alaska is arctic () with long, very cold winters and short, cool summers.
even in july, the average low temperature in utqiagvik is .
numerous indigenous peoples occupied alaska for thousands of years before the arrival of european peoples to the area.
linguistic and dna studies done here have provided evidence for the settlement of north america by way of the bering land bridge.
at the upward sun river site in the tanana river valley in alaska, remains of a six-week-old infant were found.
ben potter, the university of alaska fairbanks archaeologist who unearthed the remains at the upward river sun site in 2013, named this new group ancient beringians.
also in southeast were the haida, now well known for their unique arts.
the aleutian islands are still home to the aleut people's seafaring society, although they were the first native alaskans to be exploited by the russians.
western and southwestern alaska are home to the yup'ik, while their cousins the alutiiq ~ sugpiaq lived in what is now southcentral alaska.
the gwich'in people of the northern interior region are athabaskan and primarily known today for their dependence on the caribou within the much-contested arctic national wildlife refuge.
the north slope and little diomede island are occupied by the widespread inupiat people.
some researchers believe the first russian settlement in alaska was established in the 17th century.
according to this hypothesis, in 1648 several koches of semyon dezhnyov's expedition came ashore in alaska by storm and founded this settlement.
some modern researchers associate kheuveren with koyuk river.
another european contact with alaska occurred in 1741, when vitus bering led an expedition for the russian navy aboard the "st. peter".
the first permanent european settlement was founded in 1784.
between 1774 and 1800, spain sent several expeditions to alaska to assert its claim over the pacific northwest.
in 1789 a spanish settlement and fort were built in nootka sound.
these expeditions gave names to places such as valdez, bucareli sound, and cordova.
later, the russian-american company carried out an expanded colonization program during the early-to-mid-19th century.
it remained the capital after the colony was transferred to the united states.
the russians never fully colonized alaska, and the colony was never very profitable.
evidence of russian settlement in names and churches survive throughout southeast alaska.
six months later the commissioners arrived in sitka and the formal transfer was arranged; the formal flag-raising took place at fort sitka on october 18, 1867.
this event is celebrated as alaska day, a legal holiday on october 18.
a federal district court was headquartered in sitka.
for most of alaska's first decade under the united states flag, sitka was the only community inhabited by american settlers.
they organized a "provisional city government", which was alaska's first municipal government, but not in a legal sense.
alaska was officially incorporated as an organized territory in 1912.
alaska's capital, which had been in sitka until 1906, was moved north to juneau.
construction of the alaska governor's mansion began that same year.
european immigrants from norway and sweden also settled in southeast alaska, where they entered the fishing and logging industries.
during world war ii, the aleutian islands campaign focused on attu, agattu and kiska, all which were occupied by the empire of japan.
about half of the aleuts died during the period of internment.
unalaska/dutch harbor and adak became significant bases for the united states army, united states army air forces and united states navy.
the construction of military bases contributed to the population growth of some alaskan cities.
statehood for alaska was an important cause of james wickersham early in his tenure as a congressional delegate.
decades later, the statehood movement gained its first real momentum following a territorial referendum in 1946.
the alaska statehood committee and alaska's constitutional convention would soon follow.
statehood supporters also found themselves fighting major battles against political foes, mostly in the u.s. congress but also within alaska.
statehood was approved by congress on july 7, 1958.
alaska was officially proclaimed a state on january 3, 1959.
in 1960, the census bureau reported alaska's population as 77.2% white, 3% black, and 18.8% american indian and alaska native.
the 1968 discovery of oil at prudhoe bay and the 1977 completion of the trans-alaska pipeline system led to an oil boom.
royalty revenues from oil have funded large state budgets from 1980 onward.
that same year, not coincidentally, alaska repealed its state income tax.
in 1989, the "exxon valdez" hit a reef in the prince william sound, spilling more than of crude oil over of coastline.
, more than 35,000 sites have been reported.
in 2010, alaska ranked as the 47th state by population, ahead of north dakota, vermont, and wyoming (and washington, d.c.).
estimates show north dakota ahead .
alaska is by far the largest u.s. state by area, and the tenth wealthiest (per capita income).
, the state's unemployment rate was 6.6%.
, it is one of 14 u.s. states that still have only one telephone area code.
according to the 2010 united states census, alaska had a population of 710,231.
hispanics or latinos of any race made up 5.5% of the population.
according to the 2011 american community survey, 83.4% of people over the age of five spoke only english at home.
most of alaska's native languages belong to either the eskimo–aleut or na-dene language families; however, some languages are thought to be isolates (e.g.
haida) or have not yet been classified (e.g.
tsimshianic).
nearly all of alaska's native languages were classified as either threatened, shifting, moribund, nearly extinct, or dormant languages.
a total of 5.2% of alaskans speak one of the state's 20 indigenous languages, known locally as "native languages".
in october 2014, the governor of alaska signed a bill declaring the state's 20 indigenous languages to have official status.
this bill gave them symbolic recognition as official languages, though they have not been adopted for official use within the government.
100,960 people identified as evangelical protestants, 50,866 as roman catholic, and 32,550 as mainline protestants.
intermarriage with alaskan natives helped the russian immigrants integrate into society.
as a result, an increasing number of russian orthodox churches gradually became established within alaska.
alaska also has the largest quaker population (by percentage) of any state.
in 2009 there were 6,000 jews in alaska (for whom observance of halakha may pose special problems).
alaskan hindus often share venues and celebrations with members of other asian religious communities, including sikhs and jains.
there are an estimated 2,000–3,000 hindus in alaska.
the vast majority of hindus live in anchorage or fairbanks.
estimates for the number of muslims in alaska range from 2,000 to 5,000.
the islamic community center of anchorage began efforts in the late 1990s to construct a mosque in anchorage.
they broke ground on a building in south anchorage in 2010 and were nearing completion in late 2014.
when completed, the mosque will be the first in the state and one of the northernmost mosques in the world.
there's also a bahá'í center.
the 2018 gross state product was $55 billion, 48th in the nation.
its per capita personal income for 2018 was $73,000, ranking 7th in the nation.
the oil and gas industry dominates the alaskan economy, with more than 80% of the state's revenues derived from petroleum extraction.
alaska's main export product (excluding oil and natural gas) is seafood, primarily salmon, cod, pollock and crab.
agriculture represents a very small fraction of the alaskan economy.
agricultural production is primarily for consumption within the state and includes nursery stock, dairy products, vegetables, and livestock.
manufacturing is limited, with most foodstuffs and general goods imported from elsewhere.
employment is primarily in government and industries such as natural resource extraction, shipping, and transportation.
military bases are a significant component of the economy in the fairbanks north star, anchorage and kodiak island boroughs, as well as kodiak.
federal subsidies are also an important part of the economy, allowing the state to keep taxes low.
there is also a growing service and tourism sector.
tourists have contributed to the economy by supporting local lodging.
alaska has vast energy resources, although its oil reserves have been largely depleted.
the trans-alaska pipeline can transport and pump up to of crude oil per day, more than any other crude oil pipeline in the united states.
additionally, substantial coal deposits are found in alaska's bituminous, sub-bituminous, and lignite coal basins.
the united states geological survey estimates that there are of undiscovered, technically recoverable gas from natural gas hydrates on the alaskan north slope.
alaska also offers some of the highest hydroelectric power potential in the country from its numerous rivers.
large swaths of the alaskan coastline offer wind and geothermal energy potential as well.
alaska's economy depends heavily on increasingly expensive diesel fuel for heating, transportation, electric power and light.
although wind and hydroelectric power are abundant and underdeveloped, proposals for statewide energy systems (e.g.
it was later championed by governor jay hammond and kenai state representative hugh malone.
it has served as an attractive political prospect ever since, diverting revenues which would normally be deposited into the general fund.
the alaska constitution was written so as to discourage dedicating state funds for a particular purpose.
the permanent fund has become the rare exception to this, mostly due to the political climate of distrust existing during the time of its creation.
from its initial principal of $734,000, the fund has grown to $50 billion as a result of oil royalties and capital investment programs.
most if not all the principal is invested conservatively outside alaska.
this has led to frequent calls by alaskan politicians for the fund to make investments within alaska, though such a stance has never gained momentum.
the permanent fund is often considered to be one of the leading examples of a "basic income" policy in the world.
the cost of goods in alaska has long been higher than in the contiguous 48 states.
rural alaska suffers from extremely high prices for food and consumer goods compared to the rest of the country, due to the relatively limited transportation infrastructure.
due to the northern climate and short growing season, relatively little farming occurs in alaska.
most farms are in either the matanuska valley, about northeast of anchorage, or on the kenai peninsula, about southwest of anchorage.
the short 100-day growing season limits the crops that can be grown, but the long sunny summer days make for productive growing seasons.
the primary crops are potatoes, carrots, lettuce, and cabbage.
this area was largely set aside and developed under a state program spearheaded by hammond during his second term as governor.
delta-area crops consist predominantly of barley and hay.
west of fairbanks lies another concentration of small farms catering to restaurants, the hotel and tourist industry, and community-supported agriculture.
alaska, with no counties, lacks county fairs.
"alaska grown" is used as an agricultural slogan.
alaska has an abundance of seafood, with the primary fisheries in the bering sea and the north pacific.
seafood is one of the few food items that is often cheaper within the state than outside it.
many alaskans take advantage of salmon seasons to harvest portions of their household diet while fishing for subsistence, as well as sport.
this includes fish taken by hook, net or wheel.
hunting for subsistence, primarily caribou, moose, and dall sheep is still common in the state, particularly in remote bush communities.
alaska's reindeer herding is concentrated on seward peninsula, where wild caribou can be prevented from mingling and migrating with the domesticated reindeer.
most food in alaska is transported into the state from "outside", and shipping costs make food in the cities relatively expensive.
in rural areas, subsistence hunting and gathering is an essential activity because imported food is prohibitively expensive.
the cost of delivering a of milk is about $3.50 in many villages where per capita income can be $20,000 or less.
fuel cost per gallon is routinely twenty to thirty cents higher than the contagious united states average, with only hawaii having higher prices.
alaska has few road connections compared to the rest of the u.s.
the western part of alaska has no road system connecting the communities with the rest of alaska.
the interstate highways in alaska consists of a total of 1082 miles.
at , the tunnel was the longest road tunnel in north america until 2007.
the tunnel is the longest combination road and rail tunnel in north america.
built around 1915, the alaska railroad (arr) played a key role in the development of alaska through the 20th century.
the cities, towns, villages, and region served by arr tracks are known statewide as "the railbelt".
in recent years, the ever-improving paved highway system began to eclipse the railroad's importance in alaska's economy.
it is well known for its summertime tour passenger service.
the alaska railroad was one of the last railroads in north america to use cabooses in regular service and still uses them on some gravel trains.
it continues to offer one of the last flag stop routes in the country.
until construction of the parks highway in the 1970s, the railroad provided the only land access to most of the region along its entire route.
this line is now mainly used by tourists, often arriving by cruise liner at skagway.
it was featured in the 1983 bbc television series "great little railways."
the alaska rail network is not connected to outside.
in 2000, the u.s. congress authorized $6 million to study the feasibility of a rail link between alaska, canada, and the lower 48.
alaska rail marine provides car float service between whittier and seattle.
alaska's well-developed state-owned ferry system (known as the alaska marine highway) serves the cities of southeast, the gulf coast and the alaska peninsula.
the ferries transport vehicles as well as passengers.
the system also operates a ferry service from bellingham, washington and prince rupert, british columbia, in canada through the inside passage to skagway.
the population of ketchikan for example fluctuates dramatically on many days—up to four large cruise ships can dock there at the same time.
anchorage and, to a lesser extent fairbanks, is served by many major airlines.
because of limited highway access, air travel remains the most efficient form of transportation in and out of the state.
the bulk of remaining commercial flight offerings come from small regional commuter airlines such as ravn alaska, penair, and frontier flying service.
much of this service can be attributed to the alaska bypass mail program which subsidizes bulk mail delivery to alaskan rural communities.
the program requires 70% of that subsidy to go to carriers who offer passenger service to the communities.
many communities have small air taxi services.
these operations originated from the demand for customized transport to remote areas.
perhaps the most quintessentially alaskan plane is the bush seaplane.
in 2006 alaska had the highest number of pilots per capita of any u.s. state.
another alaskan transportation method is the dogsled.
in modern times (that is, any time after the mid-late 1920s), dog mushing is more of a sport than a true means of transportation.
mushers from all over the world come to anchorage each march to compete for cash, prizes, and prestige.
alaska's internet and other data transport systems are provided largely through the two major telecommunications companies: gci and alaska communications.
the state of alaska employs approximately 16,000 people statewide.
the alaska legislature consists of a 40-member house of representatives and a 20-member senate.
senators serve four-year terms and house members two.
the governor of alaska serves four-year terms.
alaska's court system has four levels: the alaska supreme court, the alaska court of appeals, the superior courts and the district courts.
the superior and district courts are trial courts.
the supreme court and the court of appeals are appellate courts.
the court of appeals is required to hear appeals from certain lower-court decisions, including those regarding criminal prosecutions, juvenile delinquency, and habeas corpus.
the supreme court hears civil appeals and may in its discretion hear criminal appeals.
although in its early years of statehood alaska was a democratic state, since the early 1970s it has been characterized as republican-leaning.
local political communities have often worked on issues related to land use development, fishing, tourism, and individual rights.
alaska natives, while organized in and around their communities, have been active within the native corporations.
these have been given ownership over large tracts of land, which require stewardship.
the state has an independence movement favoring a vote on secession from the united states, with the alaskan independence party.
six republicans and four democrats have served as governor of alaska.
he officially rejoined the republican party in 1994.
the new law means people over 21 can consume small amounts of pot—if they can find it.
(it is still illegal to sell.)
the first legal marijuana store opened in valdez in october 2016.
to finance state government operations, alaska depends primarily on petroleum revenues and federal subsidies.
this allows it to have the lowest individual tax burden in the united states.
the department of revenue tax division reports regularly on the state's revenue sources.
the department also issues an annual summary of its operations, including new state laws that directly affect the tax division.
in 2014 the tax foundation ranked alaska as having the fourth most "business friendly" tax policy, behind only wyoming, south dakota, and nevada.
while alaska has no state sales tax, 89 municipalities collect a local sales tax, from 1.0–7.5%, typically 3–5%.
in 2020, alaska's state government budget was $4.8 billion, while projected government revenues were only $4.5 billion.
alaska regularly supports republicans in presidential elections and has done so since statehood.
republicans have won the state's electoral college votes in all but one election that it has participated in (1964).
no state has voted for a democratic presidential candidate fewer times.
alaska was carried by democratic nominee lyndon b. johnson during his landslide election in 1964, while the 1960 and 1968 elections were close.
since 1972, however, republicans have carried the state by large margins.
in 2008, republican john mccain defeated democrat barack obama in alaska, 59.49% to 37.83%.
mccain's running mate was sarah palin, the state's governor and the first alaskan on a major party ticket.
the matanuska-susitna borough, the majority of fairbanks (including north pole and the military base), and south anchorage typically have the strongest republican showing.
because of its population relative to other u.s. states, alaska has only one member in the u.s. house of representatives.
this seat is held by republican don young, who was re-elected to his 21st consecutive term in 2012.
alaska's at-large congressional district is one of the largest parliamentary constituencies in the world by area.
in 2008, governor sarah palin became the first republican woman to run on a national ticket when she became john mccain's running mate.
she continued to be a prominent national figure even after resigning from the governor's job in july 2009.
alaska's united states senators belong to class2 and class3.
in 2008, democrat mark begich, mayor of anchorage, defeated long-time republican senator ted stevens.
stevens had been convicted on seven felony counts of failing to report gifts on senate financial discloser forms one week before the election.
the conviction was set aside in april 2009 after evidence of prosecutorial misconduct emerged.
republican frank murkowski held the state's other senatorial position.
after being elected governor in 2002, he resigned from the senate and appointed his daughter, state representative lisa murkowski, as his successor.
she won full six-year terms in 2004, 2010 and 2016.
alaska is not divided into counties, as most of the other u.s. states, but it is divided into "boroughs".
many of the more densely populated parts of the state are part of alaska's 16 boroughs, which function somewhat similarly to counties in other states.
however, unlike county-equivalents in the other 49 states, the boroughs do not cover the entire land area of the state.
the area not part of any borough is referred to as the unorganized borough.
a "recording district" is a mechanism for administration of the public record in alaska.
the state is divided into 34 recording districts which are centrally administered under a state recorder.
all recording districts use the same acceptance criteria, fee schedule, etc., for accepting documents into the public record.
whereas many u.s. states use a three-tiered system of decentralization—state/county/township—most of alaska uses only two tiers—state/borough.
owing to the low population density, most of the land is located in the unorganized borough.
as the name implies, it has no intermediate borough government but is administered directly by the state government.
in 2000, 57.71% of alaska's area has this status, with 13.05% of the population.
fairbanks has a separate borough (the fairbanks north star borough) and municipality (the city of fairbanks).
the state's most populous city is anchorage, home to 278,700 people in 2006, 225,744 of whom live in the urbanized area.
the richest location in alaska by per capita income is halibut cove ($89,895).
yakutat city, sitka, juneau, and anchorage are the four largest cities in the u.s. by area.
as reflected in the 2010 united states census, alaska has a total of 355 incorporated cities and census-designated places (cdps).
the tally of cities includes four unified municipalities, essentially the equivalent of a consolidated city–county.
the table at the bottom of this section lists the 100 largest cities and census-designated places in alaska, in population order.
the remaining population was scattered throughout alaska, both within organized boroughs and in the unorganized borough, in largely remote areas.
the alaska department of education and early development administers many school districts in alaska.
in addition, the state operates a boarding school, mt.
there are more than a dozen colleges and universities in alaska.
accredited universities in alaska include the university of alaska anchorage, university of alaska fairbanks, university of alaska southeast, and alaska pacific university.
alaska is the only state that has no institutions that are part of ncaa division i.
the alaska department of labor and workforce development operates avtec, alaska's institute of technology.
campuses in seward and anchorage offer one-week to 11-month training programs in areas as diverse as information technology, welding, nursing, and mechanics.
alaska has had a problem with a "brain drain".
many of its young people, including most of the highest academic achievers, leave the state after high school graduation and do not return.
, alaska did not have a law school or medical school.
the alaska state troopers are alaska's statewide police force.
they have a long and storied history, but were not an official organization until 1941.
before the force was officially organized, law enforcement in alaska was handled by various federal agencies.
larger towns usually have their own local police and some villages rely on "public safety officers" who have police training but do not carry firearms.
in much of the state, the troopers serve as the only police force available.
in addition to enforcing traffic and criminal law, wildlife troopers enforce hunting and fishing regulations.
due to the varied terrain and wide scope of the troopers' duties, they employ a wide variety of land, air, and water patrol vehicles.
many rural communities in alaska are considered "dry", having outlawed the importation of alcoholic beverages.
suicide rates for rural residents are higher than urban.
domestic abuse and other violent crimes are also at high levels in the state; this is in part linked to alcohol abuse.
alaska has the highest rate of sexual assault in the nation, especially in rural areas.
the average age of sexually assaulted victims is 16 years old.
in four out of five cases, the suspects were relatives, friends or acquaintances.
the stikine river attracts the largest springtime concentration of american bald eagles in the world.
the alaska native heritage center celebrates the rich heritage of alaska's 11 cultural groups.
their purpose is to encourage cross-cultural exchanges among all people and enhance self-esteem among native people.
the alaska native arts foundation promotes and markets native art from all regions and cultures in the state, using the internet.
influences on music in alaska include the traditional music of alaska natives as well as folk music brought by later immigrants from russia and europe.
the man.
the most prominent orchestra in alaska is the anchorage symphony orchestra, though the fairbanks symphony orchestra and juneau symphony are also notable.
the anchorage opera is currently the state's only professional opera company, though there are several volunteer and semi-professional organizations in the state as well.
the official state song of alaska is "alaska's flag", which was adopted in 1955; it celebrates the flag of alaska.
alaska's first independent picture entirely made in alaska was "the chechahcos", produced by alaskan businessman austin e. lathrop and filmed in and around anchorage.
released in 1924 by the alaska moving picture corporation, it was the only film the company made.
one of the most prominent movies filmed in alaska is mgm's "eskimo/mala the magnificent", starring alaska native ray mala.
in 1932 an expedition set out from mgm's studios in hollywood to alaska to film what was then billed as "the biggest picture ever made".
upon arriving in alaska, they set up "camp hollywood" in northwest alaska, where they lived during the duration of the filming.
when "eskimo" premiered at the astor theatre in new york city, the studio received the largest amount of feedback in its history.
"eskimo" was critically acclaimed and released worldwide; as a result, mala became an international movie star.
"eskimo" won the first oscar for best film editing at the academy awards, and showcased and preserved aspects of inupiat culture on film.
the 1983 disney movie "never cry wolf" was at least partially shot in alaska.
the 1991 film "white fang", based on jack london's novel and starring ethan hawke, was filmed in and around haines.
steven seagal's 1994 "on deadly ground", starring michael caine, was filmed in part at the worthington glacier near valdez.
the 1999 john sayles film "limbo", starring david strathairn, mary elizabeth mastrantonio, and kris kristofferson, was filmed in juneau.
the psychological thriller "insomnia", starring al pacino and robin williams, was shot in canada, but was set in alaska.
the 2007 film directed by sean penn, "into the wild", was partially filmed and set in alaska.
the 2007 horror feature "30 days of night" is set in barrow, alaska, but was filmed in new zealand.
many reality television shows are filmed in alaska.
in 2011 the "anchorage daily news" found ten set in the state.
agriculture is the science and art of cultivating plants and livestock.
agriculture was the key development in the rise of sedentary human civilization, whereby farming of domesticated species created food surpluses that enabled people to live in cities.
the history of agriculture began thousands of years ago.
after gathering wild grains beginning at least 105,000 years ago, nascent farmers began to plant them around 11,500 years ago.
pigs, sheep and cattle were domesticated over 10,000 years ago.
plants were independently cultivated in at least 11 regions of the world.
modern agronomy, plant breeding, agrochemicals such as pesticides and fertilizers, and technological developments have sharply increased yields, while causing widespread ecological and environmental damage.
selective breeding and modern practices in animal husbandry have similarly increased the output of meat, but have raised concerns about animal welfare and environmental damage.
environmental issues include contributions to global warming, depletion of aquifers, deforestation, antibiotic resistance, and growth hormones in industrial meat production.
genetically modified organisms are widely used, although some are banned in certain countries.
the major agricultural products can be broadly grouped into foods, fibers, fuels and raw materials (such as rubber).
food classes include cereals (grains), vegetables, fruits, oils, meat, milk, fungi and eggs.
while agriculture usually refers to human activities, certain species of ant, termite and beetle have been cultivating crops for up to 60 million years.
thus defined, it includes arable farming, horticulture, animal husbandry and forestry, but horticulture and forestry are in practice often excluded.
the development of agriculture enabled the human population to grow many times larger than could be sustained by hunting and gathering.
agriculture began independently in different parts of the globe, and included a diverse range of taxa, in at least 11 separate centres of origin.
wild grains were collected and eaten from at least 105,000 years ago.
rice was domesticated in china between 11,500 and 6,200 bc with the earliest known cultivation from 5,700 bc, followed by mung, soy and azuki beans.
sheep were domesticated in mesopotamia between 13,000 and 11,000 years ago.
cattle were domesticated from the wild aurochs in the areas of modern turkey and pakistan some 10,500 years ago.
pig production emerged in eurasia, including europe, east asia and southwest asia, where wild boar were first domesticated about 10,500 years ago.
sugarcane and some root vegetables were domesticated in new guinea around 9,000 years ago.
sorghum was domesticated in the sahel region of africa by 7,000 years ago.
cotton was domesticated in peru by 5,600 years ago, and was independently domesticated in eurasia.
in mesoamerica, wild teosinte was bred into maize by 6,000 years ago.
scholars have offered multiple hypotheses to explain the historical origins of agriculture.
then, wild stands that had previously been harvested started to be planted, and gradually came to be domesticated.
in eurasia, the sumerians started to live in villages from about 8,000 bc, relying on the tigris and euphrates rivers and a canal system for irrigation.
ploughs appear in pictographs around 3,000 bc; seed-ploughs around 2,300 bc.
farmers grew wheat, barley, vegetables such as lentils and onions, and fruits including dates, grapes, and figs.
ancient egyptian agriculture relied on the nile river and its seasonal flooding.
farming started in the predynastic period at the end of the paleolithic, after 10,000 bc.
staple food crops were grains such as wheat and barley, alongside industrial crops such as flax and papyrus.
in india, wheat, barley and jujube were domesticated by 9,000 bc, soon followed by sheep and goats.
cattle, sheep and goats were domesticated in mehrgarh culture by 8,000–6,000 bc.
cotton was cultivated by the 5th–4th millennium bc.
archeological evidence indicates an animal-drawn plough from 2,500 bc in the indus valley civilisation.
in china, from the 5th century bc there was a nationwide granary system and widespread silk farming.
water-powered grain mills were in use by the 1st century bc, followed by irrigation.
by the late 2nd century, heavy ploughs had been developed with iron ploughshares and mouldboards.
these spread westwards across eurasia.
in greece and rome, the major cereals were wheat, emmer, and barley, alongside vegetables including peas, beans, and olives.
sheep and goats were kept mainly for dairy products.
in the americas, crops domesticated in mesoamerica (apart from teosinte) include squash, beans, and cocoa.
cocoa was being domesticated by the mayo chinchipe of the upper amazon around 3,000 bc.
the turkey was probably domesticated in mexico or the american southwest.
the aztecs developed irrigation systems, formed terraced hillsides, fertilized their soil, and developed chinampas or artificial islands.
the mayas used extensive canal and raised field systems to farm swampland from 400 bc.
coca was domesticated in the andes, as were the peanut, tomato, tobacco, and pineapple.
cotton was domesticated in peru by 3,600 bc.
animals including llamas, alpacas, and guinea pigs were domesticated there.
in north america, the indigenous people of the east domesticated crops such as sunflower, tobacco, squash and "chenopodium".
wild foods including wild rice and maple sugar were harvested.
the domesticated strawberry is a hybrid of a chilean and a north american species, developed by breeding in europe and north america.
the indigenous people of the southwest and the pacific northwest practiced forest gardening and fire-stick farming.
a system of companion planting called the three sisters was developed on the great plains.
the three crops were winter squash, maize, and climbing beans.
indigenous australians, long supposed to have been nomadic hunter-gatherers, practised systematic burning to enhance natural productivity in fire-stick farming.
the gunditjmara and other groups developed eel farming and fish trapping systems from some 5,000 years ago.
there is evidence of 'intensification' across the whole continent over that period.
irrigation, crop rotation, and fertilizers advanced from the 17th century with the british agricultural revolution, allowing global population to rise significantly.
the haber-bosch method allowed the synthesis of ammonium nitrate fertilizer on an industrial scale, greatly increasing crop yields and sustaining a further increase in global population.
pastoralism involves managing domesticated animals.
in nomadic pastoralism, herds of livestock are moved from place to place in search of pasture, fodder, and water.
this type of farming is practised in arid and semi-arid regions of sahara, central asia and some parts of india.
in shifting cultivation, a small area of forest is cleared by cutting and burning the trees.
the cleared land is used for growing crops for a few years until the soil becomes too infertile, and the area is abandoned.
another patch of land is selected and the process is repeated.
this type of farming is practiced mainly in areas with abundant rainfall where the forest regenerates quickly.
this practice is used in northeast india, southeast asia, and the amazon basin.
subsistence farming is practiced to satisfy family or local needs alone, with little left over for transport elsewhere.
it is intensively practiced in monsoon asia and south-east asia.
an estimated 2.5 billion subsistence farmers worked in 2018, cultivating about 60% of the earth's arable land.
intensive farming is cultivation to maximise productivity, with a low fallow ratio and a high use of inputs (water, fertilizer, pesticide and automation).
it is practiced mainly in developed countries.
from the twentieth century, intensive agriculture increased productivity.
it substituted synthetic fertilizers and pesticides for labor, but caused increased water pollution, and often involved farm subsidies.
in recent years there has been a backlash against the environmental effects of conventional agriculture, resulting in the organic, regenerative, and sustainable agriculture movements.
the growth of organic farming has renewed research in alternative technologies such as integrated pest management, selective breeding, and controlled-environment agriculture.
recent mainstream technological developments include genetically modified food.
soil degradation and diseases such as stem rust are major concerns globally; approximately 40% of the world's agricultural land is seriously degraded.
by 2015, the agricultural output of china was the largest in the world, followed by the european union, india and the united states.
economists measure the total factor productivity of agriculture and by this measure agriculture in the united states is roughly 1.7 times more productive than it was in 1948.
since the industrial revolution, many countries have made the transition to developed economies, and the proportion of people working in agriculture has steadily fallen.
in the same countries today, the figure is less than 10%.
at the start of the 21st century, some one billion people, or over 1/3 of the available work force, were employed in agriculture.
it constitutes approximately 70% of the global employment of children, and in many countries employs the largest percentage of women of any industry.
the service sector overtook the agricultural sector as the largest global employer in 2007.
on industrialized farms, injuries frequently involve the use of agricultural machinery, and a common cause of fatal agricultural injuries in developed countries is tractor rollovers.
the international labour organization considers agriculture "one of the most hazardous of all economic sectors".
it estimates that the annual work-related death toll among agricultural employees is at least 170,000, twice the average rate of other jobs.
in addition, incidences of death, injury and illness related to agricultural activities often go unreported.
the agricultural safety and health council of america (ashca) also holds a yearly summit to discuss safety.
overall production varies by country as listed.
then the plot is left fallow to regrow forest, and the farmer moves to a new plot, returning after many more years (10–20).
this fallow period is shortened if population density grows, requiring the input of nutrients (fertilizer or manure) and some manual pest control.
annual cultivation is the next phase of intensity in which there is no fallow period.
this requires even greater nutrient and pest control inputs.
further industrialization led to the use of monocultures, when one cultivar is planted on a large acreage.
because of the low biodiversity, nutrient use is uniform and pests tend to build up, necessitating the greater use of pesticides and fertilizers.
in all of these environments perennial crops are grown (coffee, chocolate) and systems are practiced such as agroforestry.
in temperate environments, where ecosystems were predominantly grassland or prairie, highly productive annual farming is the dominant agricultural system.
important categories of food crops include cereals, legumes, forage, fruits and vegetables.
natural fibers include cotton, wool, hemp, silk and flax.
specific crops are cultivated in distinct growing regions throughout the world.
production is listed in millions of metric tons, based on fao estimates.
animal husbandry is the breeding and raising of animals for meat, milk, eggs, or wool, and for work and transport.
livestock production systems can be defined based on feed source, as grassland-based, mixed, and landless.
, 30% of earth's ice- and water-free area was used for producing livestock, with the sector employing approximately 1.3 billion people.
non-meat animals, such as milk cows and egg-producing chickens, also showed significant production increases.
global cattle, sheep and goat populations are expected to continue to increase sharply through 2050.
grassland based livestock production relies upon plant material such as shrubland, rangeland, and pastures for feeding ruminant animals.
outside nutrient inputs may be used, however manure is returned directly to the grassland as a major nutrient source.
this system is particularly important in areas where crop production is not feasible because of climate or soil, representing 30–40 million pastoralists.
mixed production systems use grassland, fodder crops and grain feed crops as feed for ruminant and monogastric (one stomach; mainly chickens and pigs) livestock.
manure is typically recycled in mixed systems as a fertilizer for crops.
synthetic fertilizers are more heavily relied upon for crop production and manure utilization becomes a challenge as well as a source for pollution.
industrialized countries use these operations to produce much of the global supplies of poultry and pork.
scientists estimate that 75% of the growth in livestock production between 2003 and 2030 will be in confined animal feeding operations, sometimes called factory farming.
much of this growth is happening in developing countries in asia, with much smaller amounts of growth in africa.
some of the practices used in commercial livestock production, including the usage of growth hormones, are controversial.
tillage varies in intensity from conventional to no-till.
pest control includes the management of weeds, insects, mites, and diseases.
chemical (pesticides), biological (biocontrol), mechanical (tillage), and cultural practices are used.
cultural practices include crop rotation, culling, cover crops, intercropping, composting, avoidance, and resistance.
nutrient management includes both the source of nutrient inputs for crop and livestock production, and the method of utilization of manure produced by livestock.
nutrient inputs can be chemical inorganic fertilizers, manure, green manure, compost and minerals.
crop nutrient use may also be managed using cultural techniques such as crop rotation or a fallow period.
water management is needed where rainfall is insufficient or variable, which occurs to some degree in most regions of the world.
some farmers use irrigation to supplement rainfall.
agriculture represents 70% of freshwater use worldwide.
payment for ecosystem services is a method of providing additional incentives to encourage farmers to conserve some aspects of the environment.
measures might include paying for reforestation upstream of a city, to improve the supply of fresh water.
crop alteration has been practiced by humankind for thousands of years, since the beginning of civilization.
significant advances in plant breeding ensued after the work of geneticist gregor mendel.
his work on dominant and recessive alleles, although initially largely ignored for almost 50 years, gave plant breeders a better understanding of genetics and breeding techniques.
crop breeding includes techniques such as plant selection with desirable traits, self-pollination and cross-pollination, and molecular techniques that genetically modify the organism.
careful selection and breeding have had enormous effects on the characteristics of crop plants.
plant selection and breeding in the 1920s and 1930s improved pasture (grasses and clover) in new zealand.
extensive x-ray and ultraviolet induced mutagenesis efforts (i.e.
primitive genetic engineering) during the 1950s produced the modern commercial varieties of grains such as wheat, corn (maize) and barley.
the green revolution popularized the use of conventional hybridization to sharply increase yield by creating "high-yielding varieties".
similarly, worldwide average wheat yields have increased from less than 1 t/ha in 1900 to more than 2.5 t/ha in 1990.
south american average wheat yields are around 2 t/ha, african under 1 t/ha, and egypt and arabia up to 3.5 to 4 t/ha with irrigation.
in contrast, the average wheat yield in countries such as france is over 8 t/ha.
genetically modified organisms (gmo) are organisms whose genetic material has been altered by genetic engineering techniques generally known as recombinant dna technology.
genetic engineering has expanded the genes available to breeders to utilize in creating desired germlines for new crops.
increased durability, nutritional content, insect and virus resistance and herbicide tolerance are a few of the attributes bred into crops through genetic engineering.
for some, gmo crops cause food safety and food labeling concerns.
numerous countries have placed restrictions on the production, import or use of gmo foods and crops.
currently a global treaty, the biosafety protocol, regulates the trade of gmos.
herbicide-resistant seed has a gene implanted into its genome that allows the plants to tolerate exposure to herbicides, including glyphosate.
these seeds allow the farmer to grow a crop that can be sprayed with herbicides to control weeds without harming the resistant crop.
herbicide-tolerant crops are used by farmers worldwide.
with the increasing use of herbicide-tolerant crops, comes an increase in the use of glyphosate-based herbicide sprays.
in some areas glyphosate resistant weeds have developed, causing farmers to switch to other herbicides.
these crops resist damage by insects.
a 2000 assessment of agriculture in the uk determined total external costs for 1996 of £2,343 million, or £208 per hectare.
both studies, which focused solely on the fiscal impacts, concluded that more should be done to internalize external costs.
neither included subsidies in their analysis, but they noted that subsidies also influence the cost of agriculture to society.
agriculture seeks to increase yield and to reduce costs.
yield increases with inputs such as fertilisers and removal of pathogens, predators, and competitors (such as weeds).
costs decrease with increasing scale of farm units, such as making fields larger; this means removing hedges, ditches and other areas of habitat.
pesticides kill insects, plants and fungi.
these and other measures have cut biodiversity to very low levels on intensively farmed land.
in 2010, the international resource panel of the united nations environment programme assessed the environmental impacts of consumption and production.
agriculture is the main source of toxins released into the environment, including insecticides, especially those used on cotton.
a senior un official, henning steinfeld, said that "livestock are one of the most significant contributors to today's most serious environmental problems".
livestock production occupies 70% of all land used for agriculture, or 30% of the land surface of the planet.
it is one of the largest sources of greenhouse gases, responsible for 18% of the world's greenhouse gas emissions as measured in co equivalents.
by comparison, all transportation emits 13.5% of the co.
through deforestation and land degradation, livestock is also driving reductions in biodiversity.
estimates of the amount of land transformed by humans vary from 39 to 50%.
land degradation, the long-term decline in ecosystem function and productivity, is estimated to be occurring on 24% of land worldwide, with cropland overrepresented.
the un-fao report cites land management as the driving factor behind degradation and reports that 1.5 billion people rely upon the degrading land.
degradation can be deforestation, desertification, soil erosion, mineral depletion, or chemical degradation (acidification and salinization).
these nutrients are major nonpoint pollutants contributing to eutrophication of aquatic ecosystems and pollution of groundwater, with harmful effects on human populations.
fertilisers also reduce terrestrial biodiversity by increasing competition for light, favouring those species that are able to benefit from the added nutrients.
agriculture accounts for 70 percent of withdrawals of freshwater resources.
agriculture is a major draw on water from aquifers, and currently draws from those underground water sources at an unsustainable rate.
pesticide use has increased since 1950 to 2.5million short tons annually worldwide, yet crop loss from pests has remained relatively constant.
the world health organization estimated in 1992 that three million pesticide poisonings occur annually, causing 220,000 deaths.
global warming and agriculture are interrelated on a global scale.
global warming is already affecting agriculture, with effects unevenly distributed across the world.
future climate change will probably negatively affect crop production in low latitude countries, while effects in northern latitudes may be positive or negative.
global warming will probably increase the risk of food insecurity for some vulnerable groups, such as the poor.
agriculture contributes to climate change by anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases, and by the conversion of non-agricultural land such as forest for agricultural use.
agriculture, forestry and land-use change contributed around 20 to 25% to global annual emissions in 2010.
a range of policies can reduce the risk of negative climate change impacts on agriculture, and greenhouse gas emissions from the agriculture sector.
current farming methods have resulted in over-stretched water resources, high levels of erosion and reduced soil fertility.
a solution would be to give value to ecosystems, recognizing environmental and livelihood tradeoffs, and balancing the rights of a variety of users and interests.
technological advancements help provide farmers with tools and resources to make farming more sustainable.
technology permits innovations like conservation tillage, a farming process which helps prevent land loss to erosion, reduces water pollution, and enhances carbon sequestration.
other potential practices include conservation agriculture, agroforestry, improved grazing, avoided grassland conversion, and biochar.
since the 1940s, agricultural productivity has increased dramatically, due largely to the increased use of energy-intensive mechanization, fertilizers and pesticides.
the vast majority of this energy input comes from fossil fuel sources.
heavy reliance on petrochemicals has raised concerns that oil shortages could increase costs and reduce agricultural output.
industrialized agriculture depends on fossil fuels in two fundamental ways: direct consumption on the farm and manufacture of inputs used on the farm.
direct consumption includes the use of lubricants and fuels to operate farm vehicles and machinery.
indirect consumption includes the manufacture of fertilizers, pesticides, and farm machinery.
in particular, the production of nitrogen fertilizer can account for over half of agricultural energy usage.
together, direct and indirect consumption by us farms accounts for about 2% of the nation's energy use.
direct and indirect energy consumption by u.s. farms peaked in 1979, and has since gradually declined.
food systems encompass not just agriculture but off-farm processing, packaging, transporting, marketing, consumption, and disposal of food and food-related items.
agriculture accounts for less than one-fifth of food system energy use in the us.
agricultural economics is economics as it relates to the "production, distribution and consumption of [agricultural] goods and services".
combining agricultural production with general theories of marketing and business as a discipline of study began in the late 1800s, and grew significantly through the 20th century.
this is related to the greater efficiency of farming, combined with the increased level of value addition (e.g.
more highly processed products) provided by the supply chain.
national government policies can significantly change the economic marketplace for agricultural products, in the form of taxation, subsidies, tariffs and other measures.
since at least the 1960s, a combination of trade restrictions, exchange rate policies and subsidies have affected farmers in both the developing and the developed world.
in the 1980s, non-subsidized farmers in developing countries experienced adverse effects from national policies that created artificially low global prices for farm products.
between the mid-1980s and the early 2000s, several international agreements limited agricultural tariffs, subsidies and other trade restrictions.
however, , there was still a significant amount of policy-driven distortion in global agricultural product prices.
the three agricultural products with the greatest amount of trade distortion were sugar, milk and rice, mainly due to taxation.
among the oilseeds, sesame had the greatest amount of taxation, but overall, feed grains and oilseeds had much lower levels of taxation than livestock products.
since the 1980s, policy-driven distortions have seen a greater decrease among livestock products than crops during the worldwide reforms in agricultural policy.
unprocessed commodities such as corn, soybeans, and cattle are generally graded to indicate quality, affecting the price the producer receives.
commodities are generally reported by production quantities, such as volume, number or weight.
agricultural policy is the set of government decisions and actions relating to domestic agriculture and imports of foreign agricultural products.
governments usually implement agricultural policies with the goal of achieving a specific outcome in the domestic agricultural product markets.
policy programs can range from financial programs, such as subsidies, to encouraging producers to enroll in voluntary quality assurance programs.
there are many influences on the creation of agricultural policy, including consumers, agribusiness, trade lobbies and other groups.
agribusiness interests hold a large amount of influence over policy making, in the form of lobbying and campaign contributions.
political action groups, including those interested in environmental issues and labor unions, also provide influence, as do lobbying organizations representing individual agricultural commodities.
aldous leonard huxley (26 july 1894 – 22 november 1963) was an english writer and philosopher.
he wrote nearly fifty books—both novels and non-fiction works—as well as wide-ranging essays, narratives, and poems.
born into the prominent huxley family, he graduated from balliol college, oxford with an undergraduate degree in english literature.
he spent the latter part of his life in the united states, living in los angeles from 1937 until his death.
by the end of his life, huxley was widely acknowledged as one of the foremost intellectuals of his time.
he was nominated for the nobel prize in literature seven times and was elected companion of literature by the royal society of literature in 1962.
huxley was a pacifist.
huxley was born in godalming, surrey, england, in 1894.
julia was the niece of poet and critic matthew arnold and the sister of mrs. humphry ward.
aldous was the grandson of thomas henry huxley, the zoologist, agnostic, and controversialist ("darwin's bulldog").
his brother julian huxley and half-brother andrew huxley also became outstanding biologists.
aldous had another brother, noel trevenen huxley (1889–1914), who took his own life after a period of clinical depression.
as a child, huxley's nickname was "ogie", short for "ogre".
he was described by his brother, julian, as someone who frequently "[contemplated] the strangeness of things".
according to his cousin and contemporary, gervas huxley, he had an early interest in drawing.
huxley's education began in his father's well-equipped botanical laboratory, after which he enrolled at hillside school near godalming.
he was taught there by his own mother for several years until she became terminally ill. after hillside he went on to eton college.
his mother died in 1908, when he was 14 (his father later remarried).
he contracted the eye disease keratitis punctata in 1911; this "left [him] practically blind for two to three years."
this "ended his early dreams of becoming a doctor."
in october 1913, huxley entered balliol college, oxford, where he studied english literature.
his eyesight later partly recovered.
he edited "oxford poetry" in 1916, and in june of that year graduated ba with first class honours.
his brother julian wrote: following his years at balliol, huxley, being financially indebted to his father, decided to find employment.
he was mainly remembered as being an incompetent schoolmaster unable to keep order in class.
nevertheless, blair and others spoke highly of his excellent command of language.
significantly, huxley also worked for a time during the 1920s at brunner and mond, an advanced chemical plant in billingham in county durham, northeast england.
"brave new world" (1932) was his fifth novel and first dystopian work.
in the 1920s he was also a contributor to "vanity fair" and british "vogue" magazines.
there he met several bloomsbury group figures, including bertrand russell, alfred north whitehead, and clive bell.
later, in "crome yellow" (1921) he caricatured the garsington lifestyle.
jobs were very scarce, but in 1919 john middleton murry was reorganising the "athenaeum" and invited huxley to join the staff.
he accepted immediately, and quickly married the belgian refugee maria nys, also at garsington.
they lived with their young son in italy part of the time during the 1920s, where huxley would visit his friend d. h. lawrence.
following lawrence's death in 1930, huxley edited lawrence's letters (1932).
in "brave new world", set in a dystopian london, huxley portrays a society operating on the principles of mass production and pavlovian conditioning.
huxley was strongly influenced by f. matthias alexander, and included him as a character in "eyeless in gaza".
in 1937 huxley moved to hollywood with his wife maria, son matthew huxley, and friend gerald heard.
the book contains tracts on war, religion, nationalism and ethics.
heard introduced huxley to vedanta (upanishad-centered philosophy), meditation, and vegetarianism through the principle of ahimsa.
in 1938, huxley befriended jiddu krishnamurti, whose teachings he greatly admired.
huxley provided an introduction to krishnamurti's quintessential statement, "the first and last freedom" (1954).
huxley also became a vedantist in the circle of hindu swami prabhavananda, and introduced christopher isherwood to this circle.
huxley became a close friend of remsen bird, president of occidental college.
he spent much time at the college, which is in the eagle rock neighbourhood of los angeles.
the college appears as "tarzana college" in his satirical novel "after many a summer" (1939).
the novel won huxley a british literary award, the 1939 james tait black memorial prize for fiction.
huxley also incorporated bird into the novel.
(eventually, the film was completed by mgm in 1943 with a different director and cast.)
the script was not used, however.
huxley wrote an introduction to the posthumous publication of j. d. unwin's 1940 book "hopousia or the sexual and economic foundations of a new society".
in his letter to orwell, he predicted: huxley had deeply felt apprehensions about the future the developed world might make for itself.
from these, he made some warnings in his writings and talks.
in 1953, huxley and maria applied for united states citizenship and presented themselves for examination.
he withdrew his application.
nevertheless, he remained in the u.s.
together with gerald heard, christopher isherwood and other followers, he was initiated by the swami and was taught meditation and spiritual practices.
from 1941 until 1960, huxley contributed 48 articles to "vedanta and the west", published by the society.
he also served on the editorial board with isherwood, heard, and playwright john van druten from 1951 through 1962.
huxley also occasionally lectured at the hollywood and santa barbara vedanta temples.
two of those lectures have been released on cd: "knowledge and understanding" and "who are we?"
from 1955.
nonetheless, huxley's agnosticism, together with his speculative propensity, made it difficult for him to fully embrace any form of institutionalised religion.
in the spring of 1953, huxley had his first experience with the psychedelic drug mescaline.
huxley later had an experience on mescaline that he considered more profound than those detailed in "the doors of perception".
differing accounts exist about the details of the quality of huxley's eyesight at specific points in his life.
in 1940, huxley relocated from hollywood to a "ranchito" in the high desert hamlet of llano, california, in northern los angeles county.
huxley then said that his sight improved dramatically with the bates method and the extreme and pure natural lighting of the southwestern american desert.
he reported that, for the first time in more than 25 years, he was able to read without glasses and without strain.
he even tried driving a car along the dirt road beside the ranch.
the book contained some generally disputed theories, and its publication created a growing degree of popular controversy about huxley's eyesight.
he wasn't reading his address at all.
he had learned it by heart.
to refresh his memory he brought the paper closer and closer to his eyes.
it was an agonising moment".
and i don't give a damn, really".
for instance, although aldous did not wear glasses, he would quite often use a magnifying lens".
laura huxley proceeded to elaborate a few nuances of inconsistency peculiar to huxley's vision.
nevertheless, the topic of huxley's eyesight continues to endure similar, significant controversy.
words, even the pregnant words of poets, do not evoke pictures in my mind.
no hypnagogic visions greet me on the verge of sleep.
when i recall something, the memory does not present itself to me as a vividly seen event or object.
by an effort of the will, i can evoke a not very vivid image of what happened yesterday afternoon ...".
huxley married maria nys (10 september 1899 – 12 february 1955), a belgian he met at garsington, oxfordshire, in 1919.
in 1955, maria huxley died of cancer.
in 1956, huxley married laura archera (1911–2007), also an author, as well as a violinist and psychotherapist.
she wrote "this timeless moment", a biography of huxley.
she told the story of their marriage through mary ann braubach's 2010 documentary, "huxley on huxley".
these lectures were fundamental to the beginning of the human potential movement.
some are also at the stanford university libraries.
the correspondence between huxley and the society is kept at the cambridge university library.
the society invited huxley to appear at a banquet and give a lecture at somerset house, london, in june 1963.
huxley wrote a draft of the speech he intended to give at the society; however, his deteriorating health meant he was not able to attend.
huxley's memorial service took place in london in december 1963; it was led by his elder brother julian.
huxley had been a long-time friend of russian composer igor stravinsky, who later dedicated his last orchestral composition to huxley.
stravinsky began "variations" in santa fé, new mexico, in july 1963, and completed the composition in hollywood on 28 october 1964.
it was first performed in chicago on 17 april 1965, by the chicago symphony orchestra, conducted by robert craft.
ada may refer to:
aberdeen is a city in scotland, united kingdom.
aberdeen may also refer to:
algae (; singular alga ) is an informal term for a large and diverse group of photosynthetic eukaryotic organisms.
it is a polyphyletic grouping, including species from multiple distinct clades.
no definition of algae is generally accepted.
one definition is that algae "have chlorophyll as their primary photosynthetic pigment and lack a sterile covering of cells around their reproductive cells".
although cyanobacteria are often referred to as "blue-green algae", most authorities exclude all prokaryotes from the definition of algae.
green algae are examples of algae that have primary chloroplasts derived from endosymbiotic cyanobacteria.
diatoms and brown algae are examples of algae with secondary chloroplasts derived from an endosymbiotic red alga.
algae exhibit a wide range of reproductive strategies, from simple asexual cell division to complex forms of sexual reproduction.
most are phototrophic, although some are mixotrophic, deriving energy both from photosynthesis and uptake of organic carbon either by osmotrophy, myzotrophy, or phagotrophy.
some other heterotrophic organisms, such as the apicomplexans, are also derived from cells whose ancestors possessed plastids, but are not traditionally considered as algae.
algae have photosynthetic machinery ultimately derived from cyanobacteria that produce oxygen as a by-product of photosynthesis, unlike other photosynthetic bacteria such as purple and green sulfur bacteria.
fossilized filamentous algae from the vindhya basin have been dated back to 1.6 to 1.7 billion years ago.
the singular is the latin word for 'seaweed' and retains that meaning in english.
the etymology is obscure.
although some speculate that it is related to latin , 'be cold', no reason is known to associate seaweed with temperature.
a more likely source is , 'binding, entwining'.
the latinization, , meant primarily the cosmetic rouge.
it could be any color: black, red, green, or blue.
accordingly, the modern study of marine and freshwater algae is called either phycology or algology, depending on whether the greek or latin root is used.
the name "fucus" appears in a number of taxa.
the committee on the international code of botanical nomenclature has recommended certain suffixes for use in the classification of algae.
the primary classification of algae is based on certain morphological features.
although carolus linnaeus (1754) included algae along with lichens in his 25th class cryptogamia, he did not elaborate further on the classification of algae.
j. g. agardh (1849–1898) divided algae into six orders: diatomaceae, nostochineae, confervoideae, ulvaceae, floriadeae and fucoideae.
around 1880, algae along with fungi were grouped under thallophyta, a division created by eichler (1836).
the scheme proposed by engler and prantl is summarised as follows: the algae contain chloroplasts that are similar in structure to cyanobacteria.
chloroplasts contain circular dna like that in cyanobacteria and are interpreted as representing reduced endosymbiotic cyanobacteria.
however, the exact origin of the chloroplasts is different among separate lineages of algae, reflecting their acquisition during different endosymbiotic events.
the table below describes the composition of the three major groups of algae.
their lineage relationships are shown in the figure in the upper right.
many of these groups contain some members that are no longer photosynthetic.
some retain plastids, but not chloroplasts, while others have lost plastids entirely.
it included elaborate illustrations of seaweed and marine algae on folded leaves.
w. h. harvey (1811–1866) and lamouroux (1813) were the first to divide macroscopic algae into four divisions based on their pigmentation.
this is the first use of a biochemical criterion in plant systematics.
harvey's four divisions are: red algae (rhodospermae), brown algae (melanospermae), green algae (chlorospermae), and diatomaceae.
unlike macroalgae, which were clearly viewed as plants, microalgae were frequently considered animals because they are often motile.
even the nonmotile (coccoid) microalgae were sometimes merely seen as stages of the lifecycle of plants, macroalgae, or animals.
with the abandonment of plant-animal dichotomous classification, most groups of algae (sometimes all) were included in protista, later also abandoned in favour of eukaryota.
in other cases, some groups were originally characterized as parasitic algae (e.g., "chlorochytrium"), but later were seen as endophytic algae.
some filamentous bacteria (e.g., "beggiatoa") were originally seen as algae.
furthermore, groups like the apicomplexans are also parasites derived from ancestors that possessed plastids, but are not included in any group traditionally seen as algae.
the first land plants probably evolved from shallow freshwater charophyte algae much like "chara" almost 500 million years ago.
these probably had an isomorphic alternation of generations and were probably filamentous.
fossils of isolated land plant spores suggest land plants may have been around as long as 475 million years ago.
a range of algal morphologies is exhibited, and convergence of features in unrelated groups is common.
the only groups to exhibit three-dimensional multicellular thalli are the reds and browns, and some chlorophytes.
apical growth is constrained to subsets of these groups: the florideophyte reds, various browns, and the charophytes.
conceptacles are another polyphyletic trait; they appear in the coralline algae and the hildenbrandiales, as well as the browns.
most of the simpler algae are unicellular flagellates or amoeboids, but colonial and nonmotile forms have developed independently among several of the groups.
these are the brown algae,—some of which may reach 50 m in length (kelps)—the red algae, and the green algae.
the most complex forms are found among the charophyte algae (see charales and charophyta), in a lineage that eventually led to the higher land plants.
the innovation that defines these nonalgal plants is the presence of female reproductive organs with protective cell layers that protect the zygote and developing embryo.
hence, the land plants are referred to as the embryophytes.
phytohormones are found not only in higher plants, but in algae, too.
some species of algae form symbiotic relationships with other organisms.
in these symbioses, the algae supply photosynthates (organic substances) to the host organism providing protection to the algal cells.
the host organism derives some or all of its energy requirements from the algae.
the fungi, or mycobionts, are mainly from the ascomycota with a few from the basidiomycota.
in nature they do not occur separate from lichens.
it is unknown when they began to associate.
a photobiont may be associated with many different mycobionts or may live independently; accordingly, lichens are named and classified as fungal species.
the association is termed a morphogenesis because the lichen has a form and capabilities not possessed by the symbiont species alone (they can be experimentally isolated).
the photobiont possibly triggers otherwise latent genes in the mycobiont.
trentepohlia is an example of a common green alga genus worldwide that can grow on its own or be lichenised.
coral reefs are accumulated from the calcareous exoskeletons of marine invertebrates of the order scleractinia (stony corals).
these animals metabolize sugar and oxygen to obtain energy for their cell-building processes, including secretion of the exoskeleton, with water and carbon dioxide as byproducts.
reef-building stony corals (hermatypic corals) require endosymbiotic algae from the genus "symbiodinium" to be in a healthy condition.
the loss of "symbiodinium" from the host is known as coral bleaching, a condition which leads to the deterioration of a reef.
endosymbiontic green algae live close to the surface of some sponges, for example, breadcrumb sponges ("halichondria panicea").
rhodophyta, chlorophyta, and heterokontophyta, the three main algal divisions, have lifecycles which show considerable variation and complexity.
asexual reproduction permits efficient population increases, but less variation is possible.
commonly, in sexual reproduction of unicellular and colonial algae, two specialized, sexually compatible, haploid gametes make physical contact and fuse to form a zygote.
to ensure a successful mating, the development and release of gametes is highly synchronized and regulated; pheromones may play a key role in these processes.
sexual reproduction allows for more variation and provides the benefit of efficient recombinational repair of dna damages during meiosis, a key stage of the sexual cycle.
however, sexual reproduction is more costly than asexual reproduction.
meiosis has been shown to occur in many different species of algae.
estimates vary widely.
another checklist reports only about 5,000 species.
most estimates also omit microscopic algae, such as phytoplankton.
the most recent estimate suggests 72,500 algal species worldwide.
the distribution of algal species has been fairly well studied since the founding of phytogeography in the mid-19th century.
algae spread mainly by the dispersal of spores analogously to the dispersal of plantae by seeds and spores.
this dispersal can be accomplished by air, water, or other organisms.
whether a spore is to grow into an organism depends on the combination of the species and the environmental conditions where the spore lands.
the spores of freshwater algae are dispersed mainly by running water and wind, as well as by living carriers.
marine spores are often spread by ocean currents.
ocean water presents many vastly different habitats based on temperature and nutrient availability, resulting in phytogeographic zones, regions, and provinces.
it is, therefore, possible to identify species occurring by locality, such as "pacific algae" or "north sea algae".
when they occur out of their localities, hypothesizing a transport mechanism is usually possible, such as the hulls of ships.
for example, "ulva reticulata" and "u. fasciata" travelled from the mainland to hawaii in this manner.
mapping is possible for select species only: "there are many valid examples of confined distribution patterns."
for example, "clathromorphum" is an arctic genus and is not mapped far south of there.
however, scientists regard the overall data as insufficient due to the "difficulties of undertaking such studies."
algae are prominent in bodies of water, common in terrestrial environments, and are found in unusual environments, such as on snow and ice.
seaweeds grow mostly in shallow marine waters, under deep; however, some such as "navicula pennata" have been recorded to a depth of .
same algae was found in the italian alps, after pink ice appeared on parts of the presena glacier.
the various sorts of algae play significant roles in aquatic ecology.
microscopic forms that live suspended in the water column (phytoplankton) provide the food base for most marine food chains.
in very high densities (algal blooms), these algae may discolor the water and outcompete, poison, or asphyxiate other life forms.
algae can be used as indicator organisms to monitor pollution in various aquatic systems.
in many cases, algal metabolism is sensitive to various pollutants.
due to this, the species composition of algal populations may shift in the presence of chemical pollutants.
to detect these changes, algae can be sampled from the environment and maintained in laboratories with relative ease.
agar, a gelatinous substance derived from red algae, has a number of commercial uses.
it is a good medium on which to grow bacteria and fungi, as most microorganisms cannot digest agar.
alginic acid, or alginate, is extracted from brown algae.
its uses range from gelling agents in food, to medical dressings.
alginic acid also has been used in the field of biotechnology as a biocompatible medium for cell encapsulation and cell immobilization.
molecular cuisine is also a user of the substance for its gelling properties, by which it becomes a delivery vehicle for flavours.
between 100,000 and 170,000 wet tons of "macrocystis" are harvested annually in new mexico for alginate extraction and abalone feed.
the break-even point for algae-based biofuels is estimated to occur by 2025.
aquatic and microscopic species are cultured in clear tanks or ponds and are either harvested or used to treat effluents pumped through the ponds.
algaculture on a large scale is an important type of aquaculture in some places.
maerl is commonly used as a soil conditioner.
naturally growing seaweeds are an important source of food, especially in asia.
laver is used to make laver bread in wales, where it is known as ; in korea, .
it is also used along the west coast of north america from california to british columbia, in hawaii and by the māori of new zealand.
sea lettuce and badderlocks are salad ingredients in scotland, ireland, greenland, and iceland.
algae is being considered a potential solution for world hunger problem.
the oils from some algae have high levels of unsaturated fatty acids.
for example, "parietochloris incisa" is very high in arachidonic acid, where it reaches up to 47% of the triglyceride pool.
scientists developed the ats, which consists of shallow, 100-foot raceways of nylon netting where algae colonies can form, and studied its efficacy for three years.
researchers collected and dried the nutrient-rich algae from the ats and studied its potential as an organic fertilizer.
they found that cucumber and corn seedlings grew just as well using ats organic fertilizer as they did with commercial fertilizers.
algae scrubbers, using bubbling upflow or vertical waterfall versions, are now also being used to filter aquaria and ponds.
various polymers can be created from algae, which can be especially useful in the creation of bioplastics.
these include hybrid plastics, cellulose based plastics, poly-lactic acid, and bio-polyethylene.
several companies have begun to produce algae polymers commercially, including for use in flip-flops and in surf boards.
the alga "stichococcus bacillaris" has been seen to colonize silicone resins used at archaeological sites; biodegrading the synthetic substance.
the natural pigments (carotenoids and chlorophylls) produced by algae can be used as alternatives to chemical dyes and coloring agents.
carrageenan, from the red alga "chondrus crispus", is used as a stabilizer in milk products.
anova was developed by the statistician ronald fisher.
while the analysis of variance reached fruition in the 20th century, antecedents extend centuries into the past according to stigler.
these include hypothesis testing, the partitioning of sums of squares, experimental techniques and the additive model.
laplace was performing hypothesis testing in the 1770s.
around 1800, laplace and gauss developed the least-squares method for combining observations, which improved upon methods then used in astronomy and geodesy.
it also initiated much study of the contributions to sums of squares.
laplace knew how to estimate a variance from a residual (rather than a total) sum of squares.
by 1827, laplace was using least squares methods to address anova problems regarding measurements of atmospheric tides.
before 1800, astronomers had isolated observational errors resulting from reaction times (the "personal equation") and had developed methods of reducing the errors.
an eloquent non-mathematical explanation of the additive effects model was available in 1885.
ronald fisher introduced the term variance and proposed its formal analysis in a 1918 article "the correlation between relatives on the supposition of mendelian inheritance".
his first application of the analysis of variance was published in 1921.
analysis of variance became widely known after being included in fisher's 1925 book "statistical methods for research workers".
randomization models were developed by several researchers.
the first was published in polish by jerzy neyman in 1923.
one of the attributes of anova that ensured its early popularity was computational elegance.
the structure of the additive model allows solution for the additive coefficients by simple algebra rather than by matrix calculations.
in the era of mechanical calculators this simplicity was critical.
the determination of statistical significance also required access to tables of the f function which were supplied by early statistics texts.
the analysis of variance can be used as an exploratory tool to explain observations.
a dog show provides an example.
a dog show is not a random sampling of the breed: it is typically limited to dogs that are adult, pure-bred, and exemplary.
a histogram of dog weights from a show might plausibly be rather complex, like the yellow-orange distribution shown in the illustrations.
suppose we wanted to predict the weight of a dog based on a certain set of characteristics of each dog.
one way to do that is to "explain" the distribution of weights by dividing the dog population into groups based on those characteristics.
in the illustrations to the right, groups are identified as "x", "x", etc.
thus, this grouping fails to explain the variation in the overall distribution (yellow-orange).
the heaviest show dogs are likely to be big, strong, working breeds, while breeds kept as pets tend to be smaller and thus lighter.
as shown by the second illustration, the distributions have variances that are considerably smaller than in the first case, and the means are more distinguishable.
however, the significant overlap of distributions, for example, means that we cannot distinguish "x" and "x" reliably.
grouping dogs according to a coin flip might produce distributions that look similar.
an attempt to explain weight by breed is likely to produce a very good fit.
all chihuahuas are light and all st bernards are heavy.
the difference in weights between setters and pointers does not justify separate breeds.
the analysis of variance provides the formal tools to justify these intuitive judgments.
a common use of the method is the analysis of experimental data or the development of models.
anova is a form of statistical hypothesis testing heavily used in the analysis of experimental data.
in the typical application of anova, the null hypothesis is that all groups are random samples from the same population.
rejecting the null hypothesis is taken to mean that the differences in observed effects between treatment groups are unlikely to be due to random chance.
by construction, hypothesis testing limits the rate of type i errors (false positives) to a significance level.
experimenters also wish to limit type ii errors (false negatives).
the terminology of anova is largely from the statistical design of experiments.
the experimenter adjusts factors and measures responses in an attempt to determine an effect.
factors are assigned to experimental units by a combination of randomization and blocking to ensure the validity of the results.
blinding keeps the weighing impartial.
responses show a variability that is partially the result of the effect and is partially random error.
anova is the synthesis of several ideas and it is used for multiple purposes.
as a consequence, it is difficult to define concisely or precisely.
anova "is probably the most useful technique in the field of statistical inference."
anova is difficult to teach, particularly for complex experiments, with split-plot designs being notorious.
in some cases the proper application of the method is best determined by problem pattern recognition followed by the consultation of a classic authoritative test.
(condensed from the "nist engineering statistics handbook": section 5.7.
a glossary of doe terminology.)
there are three classes of models used in the analysis of variance, and these are outlined here.
this allows the experimenter to estimate the ranges of response variable values that the treatment would generate in the population as a whole.
random-effects model (class ii) is used when the treatments are not fixed.
this occurs when the various factor levels are sampled from a larger population.
a mixed-effects model (class iii) contains experimental factors of both fixed and random-effects types, with appropriately different interpretations and analysis for the two types.
example: teaching experiments could be performed by a college or university department to find a good introductory textbook, with each text considered a treatment.
the fixed-effects model would compare a list of candidate texts.
the random-effects model would determine whether important differences exist among a list of randomly selected texts.
the mixed-effects model would compare the (fixed) incumbent texts to randomly selected alternatives.
defining fixed and random effects has proven elusive, with competing definitions arguably leading toward a linguistic quagmire.
note that the model is linear in parameters but may be nonlinear across factor levels.
interpretation is easy when data is balanced across factors but much deeper understanding is needed for unbalanced data.
this randomization is objective and declared before the experiment is carried out.
the objective random-assignment is used to test the significance of the null hypothesis, following the ideas of c. s. peirce and ronald fisher.
this design-based analysis was discussed and developed by francis j. anscombe at rothamsted experimental station and by oscar kempthorne at iowa state university.
kempthorne and his students make an assumption of "unit treatment additivity", which is discussed in the books of kempthorne and david r. cox.
the assumption of unit treatment additivity usually cannot be directly falsified, according to cox and kempthorne.
however, many "consequences" of treatment-unit additivity can be falsified.
for a randomized experiment, the assumption of unit-treatment additivity "implies" that the variance is constant for all treatments.
therefore, by contraposition, a necessary condition for unit-treatment additivity is that the variance is constant.
the use of unit treatment additivity and randomization is similar to the design-based inference that is standard in finite-population survey sampling.
however, there are differences.
for example, the randomization-based analysis results in a small but (strictly) negative correlation between the observations.
in the randomization-based analysis, there is "no assumption" of a "normal" distribution and certainly "no assumption" of "independence".
on the contrary, "the observations are dependent"!
the randomization-based analysis has the disadvantage that its exposition involves tedious algebra and extensive time.
since the randomization-based analysis is complicated and is closely approximated by the approach using a normal linear model, most teachers emphasize the normal linear model approach.
few statisticians object to model-based analysis of balanced randomized experiments.
however, when applied to data from non-randomized experiments or observational studies, model-based analysis lacks the warrant of randomization.
for observational data, the derivation of confidence intervals must use "subjective" models, as emphasized by ronald fisher and his followers.
in practice, the estimates of treatment-effects from observational studies generally are often inconsistent.
in practice, "statistical models" and observational data are useful for suggesting hypotheses that should be treated very cautiously by the public.
the normal-model based anova analysis assumes the independence, normality and homogeneity of variances of the residuals.
both these analyses require homoscedasticity, as an assumption for the normal-model analysis and as a consequence of randomization and additivity for the randomization-based analysis.
however, studies of processes that change variances rather than means (called dispersion effects) have been successfully conducted using anova.
problems which do not satisfy the assumptions of anova can often be transformed to satisfy the assumptions.
the property of unit-treatment additivity is not invariant under a "change of scale", so statisticians often use transformations to achieve unit-treatment additivity.
also, a statistician may specify that logarithmic transforms be applied to the responses, which are believed to follow a multiplicative model.
according to cauchy's functional equation theorem, the logarithm is the only continuous transformation that transforms real multiplication to addition.
anova is used in the analysis of comparative experiments, those in which only the difference in outcomes is of interest.
the statistical significance of the experiment is determined by a ratio of two variances.
this ratio is independent of several possible alterations to the experimental observations: adding a constant to all observations does not alter significance.
multiplying all observations by a constant does not alter significance.
so anova statistical significance result is independent of constant bias and scaling errors as well as the units used in expressing observations.
in the era of mechanical calculation it was common to subtract a constant from all observations (when equivalent to dropping leading digits) to simplify data entry.
this is an example of data coding.
anova uses traditional standardized terminology.
the fundamental technique is a partitioning of the total sum of squares "ss" into components related to the effects used in the model.
for example, the model for a simplified anova with one type of treatment at different levels.
see also lack-of-fit sum of squares.
the "f"-test is used for comparing the factors of the total deviation.
the expected value of f is formula_21 (where formula_22 is the treatment sample size) which is 1 for no treatment effect.
as values of f increase above 1, the evidence is increasingly inconsistent with the null hypothesis.
two apparent experimental methods of increasing f are increasing the sample size and reducing the error variance by tight experimental controls.
maximizing power for a fixed significance level).
such permutation tests characterize tests with maximum power against all alternative hypotheses, as observed by rosenbaum.
anova consists of separable parts; partitioning sources of variance and hypothesis testing can be used individually.
anova is used to support other statistical tools.
the more complex experiments share many of the complexities of multiple factors.
a relatively complete discussion of the analysis (models, data summaries, anova table) of the completely randomized experiment is available.
anova generalizes to the study of the effects of multiple factors.
when the experiment includes observations at all combinations of levels of each factor, it is termed factorial.
factorial experiments are more efficient than a series of single factor experiments and the efficiency grows as the number of factors increases.
consequently, factorial designs are heavily used.
the use of anova to study the effects of multiple factors has a complication.
all terms require hypothesis tests.
the proliferation of interaction terms increases the risk that some hypothesis test will produce a false positive by chance.
fortunately, experience says that high order interactions are rare.
the ability to detect interactions is a major advantage of multiple factor anova.
testing one factor at a time hides interactions, but produces apparently inconsistent experimental results.
caution is advised when encountering interactions; test interaction terms first and expand the analysis beyond anova if interactions are found.
texts vary in their recommendations regarding the continuation of the anova procedure after encountering an interaction.
interactions complicate the interpretation of experimental data.
neither the calculations of significance nor the estimated treatment effects can be taken at face value.
"a significant interaction will often mask the significance of main effects."
graphical methods are recommended to enhance understanding.
regression is often useful.
a lengthy discussion of interactions is available in cox (1958).
some interactions can be removed (by transformations) while others cannot.
a variety of techniques are used with multiple factor anova to reduce expense.
an experiment with many insignificant factors may collapse into one with a few factors supported by many replications.
numerous fully worked numerical examples are available in standard textbooks and online.
a simple case uses one-way (a single factor) analysis.
because experimentation is iterative, the results of one experiment alter plans for following experiments.
in the design of an experiment, the number of experimental units is planned to satisfy the goals of the experiment.
experimentation is often sequential.
early experiments are often designed to provide mean-unbiased estimates of treatment effects and of experimental error.
reporting sample size analysis is generally required in psychology.
"provide information on sample size and the process that led to sample size decisions."
the analysis, which is written in the experimental protocol before the experiment is conducted, is examined in grant applications and administrative review boards.
besides the power analysis, there are less formal methods for selecting the number of experimental units.
standardized effect-size estimates facilitate comparison of findings across studies and disciplines.
it is always appropriate to carefully consider outliers.
they have a disproportionate impact on statistical conclusions and are often the result of errors.
it is prudent to verify that the assumptions of anova have been met.
residuals are examined or analyzed to confirm homoscedasticity and gross normality.
residuals should have the appearance of (zero mean normal distribution) noise when plotted as a function of anything including time and modeled data values.
trends hint at interactions among factors or among observations.
a statistically significant effect in anova is often followed up with one or more different follow-up tests.
this can be done in order to assess which groups are different from which other groups or to test various other focused hypotheses.
follow-up tests are often distinguished in terms of whether they are planned (a priori) or post hoc.
planned tests are determined before looking at the data and post hoc tests are performed after looking at the data.
often one of the "treatments" is none, so the treatment group can act as a control.
dunnett's test (a modification of the "t"-test) tests whether each of the other treatment groups has the same mean as the control.
comparisons, which are most commonly planned, can be either simple or compound.
simple comparisons compare one group mean with one other group mean.
comparisons can also look at tests of trend, such as linear and quadratic relationships, when the independent variable involves ordered levels.
following anova with pair-wise multiple-comparison tests has been criticized on several grounds.
there are many such tests (10 in one table) and recommendations regarding their use are vague or conflicting.
there are several types of anova.
it is also common to apply anova to observational data using an appropriate statistical model.
for single-factor (one-way) anova, the adjustment for unbalanced data is easy, but the unbalanced analysis lacks both robustness and power.
for more complex designs the lack of balance leads to further complications.
"the orthogonality property of main effects and interactions present in balanced data does not carry over to the unbalanced case.
this means that the usual analysis of variance techniques do not apply.
consequently, the analysis of unbalanced factorials is much more difficult than that for balanced designs."
the simplest techniques for handling unbalanced data restore balance by either throwing out data or by synthesizing missing data.
more complex techniques use regression.
anova is (in part) a test of statistical significance.
the american psychological association (and many other organisations) holds the view that simply reporting statistical significance is insufficient and that reporting confidence bounds is preferred.
while anova is conservative (in maintaining a significance level) against multiple comparisons in one dimension, it is not conservative against comparisons in multiple dimensions.
a common mistake is to use an anova (or kruskal–wallis) for analysis of ordered groups, e.g.
data in three or more ordered groups that are defined by the researcher should be analysed by linear trend estimation.
anova is considered to be a special case of linear regression which in turn is a special case of the general linear model.
all consider the observations to be the sum of a model (fit) and a residual (error) to be minimized.
the kruskal–wallis test and the friedman test are nonparametric tests, which do not rely on an assumption of normality.
below we make clear the connection between multi-way anova and linear regression.
in one-way anova formula_28 and in two-way anova formula_29.
furthermore, we assume the formula_30 factor has formula_31 levels, namely formula_32.
now, we can one-hot encode the factors into the formula_33 dimensional vector formula_34.
thus, formula_41.
in order to obtain a fully general formula_27-way interaction anova we must also concatenate every additional interaction term in the vector formula_34 and then add an intercept term.
let that vector be formula_44.
with this notation in place, we now have the exact connection with linear regression.
we simply regress response formula_24 against the vector formula_44.
however, there is a concern about identifiability.
in order to overcome such issues we assume that the sum of the parameters within each set of interactions is equal to zero.
from here, one can use "f"-statistics or other methods to determine the relevance of the individual factors.
we can consider the 2-way interaction example where we assume that the first factor has 2 levels and the second factor has 3 levels.
define formula_47 if formula_48 and formula_49 if formula_50, i.e.
formula_51 is the one-hot encoding of the first factor and formula_40 is the one-hot encoding of the second factor.
with that, formula_53 where the last term is an intercept term.
for a more concrete example suppose that formula_54 then, formula_55
in organic chemistry, an alkane, or paraffin (a historical name that also has other meanings), is an acyclic saturated hydrocarbon.
in other words, an alkane consists of hydrogen and carbon atoms arranged in a tree structure in which all the carbon–carbon bonds are single.
alkanes have the general chemical formula ch.
iupac defines alkanes as "acyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbons having the general formula , and therefore consisting entirely of hydrogen atoms and saturated carbon atoms".
however, some sources use the term to denote "any" saturated hydrocarbon, including those that are either monocyclic (i.e.
the cycloalkanes) or polycyclic, despite their having a distinct general formula (i.e.
cycloalkanes are ch).
the longest series of linked carbon atoms in a molecule is known as its carbon skeleton or carbon backbone.
the number of carbon atoms may be considered as the size of the alkane.
methane is produced by methanogenic bacteria and some long-chain alkanes function as pheromones in certain animal species or as protective waxes in plants and fungi.
nevertheless, most alkanes do not have much biological activity.
they can be viewed as molecular trees upon which can be hung the more active/reactive functional groups of biological molecules.
the alkanes have two main commercial sources: petroleum (crude oil) and natural gas.
an alkyl group is an alkane-based molecular fragment that bears one open valence for bonding.
saturated hydrocarbons are hydrocarbons having only single covalent bonds between their carbons.
they can be: according to the definition by iupac, the former two are alkanes, whereas the third group is called cycloalkanes.
alkanes are the acyclic (loopless) ones, corresponding to "k" = 0.
alkanes with more than three carbon atoms can be arranged in various ways, forming structural isomers.
the simplest isomer of an alkane is the one in which the carbon atoms are arranged in a single chain with no branches.
this isomer is sometimes called the "n"-isomer ("n" for "normal", although it is not necessarily the most common).
however the chain of carbon atoms may also be branched at one or more points.
the number of possible isomers increases rapidly with the number of carbon atoms.
for example, for acyclic alkanes: branched alkanes can be chiral.
for example, 3-methylhexane and its higher homologues are chiral due to their stereogenic center at carbon atom number 3.
the above list only includes differences of connectivity, not stereochemistry.
in addition to the alkane isomers, the chain of carbon atoms may form one or more rings.
such compounds are called cycloalkanes, and are also excluded from the above list because changing the number of rings changes the molecular formula.
cyclobutane and methylcyclopropane are isomers of each other, but are not isomers of butane.
the iupac nomenclature (systematic way of naming compounds) for alkanes is based on identifying hydrocarbon chains.
unbranched, saturated hydrocarbon chains are named systematically with a greek numerical prefix denoting the number of carbons and the suffix "-ane".
it is difficult or impossible to find compounds with more than one iupac name.
this is because shorter chains attached to longer chains are prefixes and the convention includes brackets.
symmetric compounds will have two ways of arriving at the same name.
alternative names for this group are: linear paraffins or "n"-paraffins.
hence, pentane, ch; hexane, ch; heptane, ch; octane, ch; etc.
the prefix is generally greek, however alkanes with a carbon atom count ending in nine, for example nonane, use the latin prefix non-.
for a more complete list, see list of alkanes.
iupac naming conventions can be used to produce a systematic name.
as their description implies, they contain one or more rings.
simple cycloalkanes have a prefix "cyclo-" to distinguish them from alkanes.
in a similar manner, propane and cyclopropane, butane and cyclobutane, etc.
the trivial (non-systematic) name for alkanes is 'paraffins'.
together, alkanes are known as the 'paraffin series'.
trivial names for compounds are usually historical artifacts.
they were coined before the development of systematic names, and have been retained due to familiar usage in industry.
cycloalkanes are also called naphthenes.
it is almost certain that the term 'paraffin' stems from the petrochemical industry.
branched-chain alkanes are called isoparaffins.
the following trivial names are retained in the iupac system: some non-iupac trivial names are occasionally used: all alkanes are colorless.
alkanes with the lowest molecular weights are gasses, those of intermediate molecular weight are liquids, and the heaviest are waxy solids.
alkanes experience intermolecular van der waals forces.
stronger intermolecular van der waals forces give rise to greater boiling points of alkanes.
as a rule of thumb, the boiling point rises 20–30 °c for each carbon added to the chain; this rule applies to other homologous series.
for the latter case, two molecules 2,3-dimethylbutane can "lock" into each other better than the cross-shaped 2,2-dimethylbutane, hence the greater van der waals forces.
the melting points of the alkanes follow a similar trend to boiling points for the same reason as outlined above.
that is, (all other things being equal) the larger the molecule the higher the melting point.
there is one significant difference between boiling points and melting points.
solids have more rigid and fixed structure than liquids.
this rigid structure requires energy to break down.
thus the better put together solid structures will require more energy to break apart.
for alkanes, this can be seen from the graph above (i.e., the blue line).
the odd-numbered alkanes have a lower trend in melting points than even numbered alkanes.
this is because even numbered alkanes pack well in the solid phase, forming a well-organized structure, which requires more energy to break apart.
the odd-numbered alkanes pack less well and so the "looser" organized solid packing structure requires less energy to break apart.
for a visualization of the crystal structures see.
alkanes do not conduct electricity in any way, nor are they substantially polarized by an electric field.
for this reason, they do not form hydrogen bonds and are insoluble in polar solvents such as water.
their solubility in nonpolar solvents is relatively high, a property that is called lipophilicity.
alkanes are, for example, miscible in all proportions among themselves.
the density of the alkanes usually increases with the number of carbon atoms but remains less than that of water.
hence, alkanes form the upper layer in an alkane–water mixture.
the molecular structure of the alkanes directly affects their physical and chemical characteristics.
it is derived from the electron configuration of carbon, which has four valence electrons.
an alkane has only c–h and c–c single bonds.
the bond lengths amount to 1.09 × 10 m for a c–h bond and 1.54 × 10 m for a c–c bond.
the spatial arrangement of the bonds is similar to that of the four sp orbitals—they are tetrahedrally arranged, with an angle of 109.47° between them.
structural formulae that represent the bonds as being at right angles to one another, while both common and useful, do not correspond with the reality.
the structural formula and the bond angles are not usually sufficient to completely describe the geometry of a molecule.
the spatial arrangement described by the torsion angles of the molecule is known as its conformation.
ethane forms the simplest case for studying the conformation of alkanes, as there is only one c–c bond.
if one looks down the axis of the c–c bond, one will see the so-called newman projection.
this is a consequence of the free rotation about a carbon–carbon single bond.
despite this apparent freedom, only two limiting conformations are important: eclipsed conformation and staggered conformation.
there is constant rotation about the c–c bond.
the case of higher alkanes is more complex but based on similar principles, with the antiperiplanar conformation always being the most favored around each carbon–carbon bond.
for this reason, alkanes are usually shown in a zigzag arrangement in diagrams or in models.
virtually all organic compounds contain carbon–carbon, and carbon–hydrogen bonds, and so show some of the features of alkanes in their spectra.
the carbon–hydrogen stretching mode gives a strong absorption between 2850 and 2960 cm, while the carbon–carbon stretching mode absorbs between 800 and 1300 cm.
carbon chains with more than four carbon atoms show a weak absorption at around 725 cm.
the proton resonances of alkanes are usually found at "δ" = 0.5–1.5.
alkanes have a high ionization energy, and the molecular ion is usually weak.
alkanes are only weakly reactive with most chemical compounds.
similarly, they only show reactivity with the strongest of electrophilic reagents (e.g., dioxiranes and salts containing the nf cation).
this inertness is the source of the term "paraffins" (with the meaning here of "lacking affinity").
in crude oil the alkane molecules have remained chemically unchanged for millions of years.
free radical halogenation reactions occur with halogens, leading to the production of haloalkanes.
in addition, alkanes have been shown to interact with, and bind to, certain transition metal complexes in c–h bond activation reactions.
in highly branched alkanes, the bond angle may differ significantly from the optimal value (109.5°) to accommodate bulky groups.
such distortions introduce a tension in the molecule, known as steric hindrance or strain.
strain substantially increases reactivity.
for example, the highly branched 2,2,3,3-tetramethylbutane is about 1.9 kcal/mol more stable than its linear isomer, "n"-octane.
due to the subtlety of this effect, the exact reasons for this rule have been vigorously debated in the chemical literature and is yet unsettled.
the controversy is related to the question of whether the traditional explanation of hyperconjugation is the primary factor governing the stability of alkyl radicals.
all alkanes react with oxygen in a combustion reaction, although they become increasingly difficult to ignite as the number of carbon atoms increases.
the standard enthalpy change of combustion, δ"h", for alkanes increases by about 650 kj/mol per ch group.
alkanes react with halogens in a so-called "free radical halogenation" reaction.
the hydrogen atoms of the alkane are progressively replaced by halogen atoms.
free radicals are the reactive species that participate in the reaction, which usually leads to a mixture of products.
the reaction is highly exothermic, and can lead to an explosion.
these reactions are an important industrial route to halogenated hydrocarbons.
there are three steps: experiments have shown that all halogenation produces a mixture of all possible isomers, indicating that all hydrogen atoms are susceptible to reaction.
an example can be seen in the monobromination of propane: cracking breaks larger molecules into smaller ones.
this can be done with a thermal or catalytic method.
the thermal cracking process follows a homolytic mechanism with formation of free-radicals.
in both types of processes, the corresponding reactive intermediates (radicals, ions) are permanently regenerated, and thus they proceed by a self-propagating chain mechanism.
the chain of reactions is eventually terminated by radical or ion recombination.
dragan and his colleague were the first to report about isomerization in alkanes.
isomerization and reformation are processes in which straight-chain alkanes are heated in the presence of a platinum catalyst.
in isomerization, the alkanes become branched-chain isomers.
in other words, it does not lose any carbons or hydrogens, keeping the same molecular weight.
in reformation, the alkanes become cycloalkanes or aromatic hydrocarbons, giving off hydrogen as a by-product.
both of these processes raise the octane number of the substance.
butane is the most common alkane that is put under the process of isomerization, as it makes many branched alkanes with high octane numbers.
alkanes will react with steam in the presence of a nickel catalyst to give hydrogen.
alkanes can be chlorosulfonated and nitrated, although both reactions require special conditions.
the fermentation of alkanes to carboxylic acids is of some technical importance.
in the reed reaction, sulfur dioxide, chlorine and light convert hydrocarbons to sulfonyl chlorides.
nucleophilic abstraction can be used to separate an alkane from a metal.
alkyl groups can be transferred from one compound to another by transmetalation reactions.
a mixture of antimony pentafluoride (sbf) and fluorosulfonic acid (hsof), called magic acid, can protonate alkanes.
also on titan the cassini mission has imaged seasonal methane/ethane lakes near the polar regions of titan.
methane and ethane have also been detected in the tail of the comet hyakutake.
alkanes have also been detected in meteorites such as carbonaceous chondrites.
the most important commercial sources for alkanes are natural gas and oil.
natural gas contains primarily methane and ethane, with some propane and butane: oil is a mixture of liquid alkanes and other hydrocarbons.
they have formed over millions of years and once exhausted cannot be readily replaced.
the depletion of these hydrocarbons reserves is the basis for what is known as the energy crisis.
methane is also present in what is called biogas, produced by animals and decaying matter, which is a possible renewable energy source.
methane extracted from methane clathrate is, therefore, a candidate for future fuels.
acyclic alkanes occur in nature in various ways.
certain types of bacteria can metabolize alkanes: they prefer even-numbered carbon chains as they are easier to degrade than odd-numbered chains.
on the other hand, certain archaea, the methanogens, produce large quantities of methane by the metabolism of carbon dioxide or other oxidized organic compounds.
the energy is released by the oxidation of hydrogen: methanogens are also the producers of marsh gas in wetlands.
the methane output of cattle and other herbivores, which can release 30 to 50 gallons per day, and of termites, is also due to methanogens.
they also produce this simplest of all alkanes in the intestines of humans.
methanogenic archaea are, hence, at the end of the carbon cycle, with carbon being released back into the atmosphere after having been fixed by photosynthesis.
it is probable that our current deposits of natural gas were formed in a similar way.
alkanes also play a role, if a minor role, in the biology of the three eukaryotic groups of organisms: fungi, plants and animals.
the fungus "amorphotheca resinae" prefers the longer-chain alkanes in aviation fuel, and can cause serious problems for aircraft in tropical regions.
in plants, the solid long-chain alkanes are found in the plant cuticle and epicuticular wax of many species, but are only rarely major constituents.
they protect the plant against water loss, prevent the leaching of important minerals by the rain, and protect against bacteria, fungi, and harmful insects.
more volatile short-chain alkanes are also produced by and found in plant tissues.
floral scents have also long been known to contain volatile alkane components, and "n"-nonane is a significant component in the scent of some roses.
alkanes are found in animal products, although they are less important than unsaturated hydrocarbons.
one example is the shark liver oil, which is approximately 14% pristane (2,6,10,14-tetramethylpentadecane, ch).
they are important as pheromones, chemical messenger materials, on which insects depend for communication.
in some species, e.g.
the support beetle "xylotrechus colonus", pentacosane (ch), 3-methylpentaicosane (ch) and 9-methylpentaicosane (ch) are transferred by body contact.
waggle-dancing honey bees produce and release two alkanes, tricosane and pentacosane.
as stated earlier, the most important source of alkanes is natural gas and crude oil.
alkanes are separated in an oil refinery by fractional distillation and processed into many products.
the fischer–tropsch process is a method to synthesize liquid hydrocarbons, including alkanes, from carbon monoxide and hydrogen.
this method is used to produce substitutes for petroleum distillates.
there is usually little need for alkanes to be synthesized in the laboratory, since they are usually commercially available.
also, alkanes are generally unreactive chemically or biologically, and do not undergo functional group interconversions cleanly.
when alkanes are produced in the laboratory, it is often a side-product of a reaction.
to do so, the best-known methods are hydrogenation of alkenes: alkanes or alkyl groups can also be prepared directly from alkyl halides in the corey–house–posner–whitesides reaction.
the barton–mccombie deoxygenation removes hydroxyl groups from alcohols e.g.
and the clemmensen reduction removes carbonyl groups from aldehydes and ketones to form alkanes or alkyl-substituted compounds e.g.
: alkanes can be prepared from a variety of organic compounds.these include alkenes, alkynes, haloalkanes, alcohols, aldehydes and ketones and carboxylic acids.
when alkenes and alkynes are subjected to hydrogenation reaction by treating them with hydrogen in the presence of palladium or platinum or nickel catalyst, they produce alkanes.
in this reaction powdered catalyst is preferred to increase the surface area so that adsorption of hydrogen on the catalyst increases.
alkanes can be produced from haloalkanes using different methods.
when haloalkane is treated with sodium in dry ether, alkane with double the number of carbon atoms is obtained.
this reaction proceeds through free radical intermediate and has possibility of alkene formation in case of tertiary haloalkanes and vicinal dihalides.
when haloalkane is treated with dialkyl lithium cuprite, which is otherwise known as gilman's reagent, any higher alkane is obtained.
when haloalkanes are treated with metal hydride ,eg, sodium hydride and lithium aluminium hydride.
when haloalkane is treated with zinc in ester, alkane is obtained.
when aryl halide is treated with sodium in dry ether, it forms biphenyl.
when aryl halide is treated with copper, it forms biphenyl.
when aryl halide is treated with haloalkane, we get alkyl benzene.
the applications of alkanes depend on the number of carbon atoms.
the first four alkanes are used mainly for heating and cooking purposes, and in some countries for electricity generation.
methane and ethane are the main components of natural gas; they are normally stored as gases under pressure.
it is, however, easier to transport them as liquids: this requires both compression and cooling of the gas.
propane and butane are gases at atmospheric pressure that can be liquefied at fairly low pressures and are commonly known as liquified petroleum gas (lpg).
propane is used in propane gas burners and as a fuel for road vehicles, butane in space heaters and disposable cigarette lighters.
both are used as propellants in aerosol sprays.
from pentane to octane the alkanes are highly volatile liquids.
branched-chain alkanes are preferred as they are much less prone to premature ignition, which causes knocking, than their straight-chain homologues.
apart from their use as fuels, the middle alkanes are also good solvents for nonpolar substances.
they form instead the major part of diesel and aviation fuel.
diesel fuels are characterized by their cetane number, cetane being an old name for hexadecane.
alkanes from hexadecane upwards form the most important components of fuel oil and lubricating oil.
in the latter function, they work at the same time as anti-corrosive agents, as their hydrophobic nature means that water cannot reach the metal surface.
many solid alkanes find use as paraffin wax, for example, in candles.
this should not be confused however with true wax, which consists primarily of esters.
alkanes with a chain length of approximately 35 or more carbon atoms are found in bitumen, used, for example, in road surfacing.
however, the higher alkanes have little value and are usually split into lower alkanes by cracking.
some synthetic polymers such as polyethylene and polypropylene are alkanes with chains containing hundreds or thousands of carbon atoms.
these materials are used in innumerable applications, and billions of kilograms of these materials are made and used each year.
alkanes are chemically very inert apolar molecules which are not very reactive as organic compounds.
this inertness yields serious ecological issues if they are released into the environment.
due to their lack of functional groups and low water solubility, alkanes show poor bioavailability for microorganisms.
there are, however, some microorganisms possessing the metabolic capacity to utilize "n"-alkanes as both carbon and energy sources.
some bacterial species are highly specialised in degrading alkanes; these are referred to as hydrocarbonoclastic bacteria.
methane is flammable, explosive and dangerous to inhale, because it is a colorless, odorless gas, special caution must be taken around methane.
ethane is also extremely flammable, dangerous to inhale and explosive.
both of these may cause suffocation.
similarly, propane is flammable and explosive.
it may cause drowsiness or unconsciousness if inhaled.
butane has the same hazards to consider as propane.
alkanes also pose a threat to the environment.
branched alkanes have a lower biodegradability than unbranched alkanes.
however, methane is ranked as the most dangerous greenhouse gas.
although the amount of methane in the atmosphere is low, it does pose a threat to the environment.
united states appellate procedure involves the rules and regulations for filing appeals in state courts and federal courts.
the nature of an appeal can vary greatly depending on the type of case and the rules of the court in the jurisdiction where the case was prosecuted.
there are many types of standard of review for appeals, such as "de novo" and abuse of discretion.
however, most appeals begin when a party files a petition for review to a higher court for the purpose of overturning the lower court's decision.
an appellate court is a court that hears cases on appeal from another court.
these grounds typically could include errors of law, fact, procedure or due process.
in different jurisdictions, appellate courts are also called appeals courts, courts of appeals, superior courts, or supreme courts.
a "cross-appeal" is an appeal brought by the respondent.
for example, suppose at trial the judge found for the plaintiff and ordered the defendant to pay $50,000.
the winning party from the lower court, however, is now the respondent.
in unusual cases the appellant can be the victor in the court below, but still appeal.
an appellee is the party to an appeal in which the lower court judgment was in its favor.
the appellee is required to respond to the petition, oral arguments, and legal briefs of the appellant.
in general, the appellee takes the procedural posture that the lower court's decision should be affirmed.
an appeal "as of right" is one that is guaranteed by statute or some underlying constitutional or legal principle.
the appellate court cannot refuse to listen to the appeal.
in the supreme court, review in most cases is available only if the court exercises its discretion and grants a writ of certiorari.
in tort, equity, or other civil matters either party to a previous case may file an appeal.
in criminal matters, however, the state or prosecution generally has no appeal "as of right".
and due to the double jeopardy principle, the state or prosecution may never appeal a jury or bench verdict of acquittal.
likewise, in some jurisdictions, the state or prosecution may appeal an issue of law "by leave" from the trial court or the appellate court.
the ability of the prosecution to appeal a decision in favor of a defendant varies significantly internationally.
all parties must present grounds to appeal, or it will not be heard.
by convention in some law reports, the appellant is named first.
this is not always true, however.
many jurisdictions recognize two types of appeals, particularly in the criminal context.
the first is the traditional "direct" appeal in which the appellant files an appeal with the next higher court of review.
the key distinguishing factor between direct and collateral appeals is that the former occurs in state courts, and the latter in federal courts.
relief in post-conviction is rare and is most often found in capital or violent felony cases.
the typical scenario involves an incarcerated defendant locating dna evidence demonstrating the defendant's actual innocence.
"appellate review" is the general term for the process by which courts with appellate jurisdiction take jurisdiction of matters decided by lower courts.
in most jurisdictions the normal and preferred way of seeking appellate review is by filing an appeal of the final judgment.
generally, an appeal of the judgment will also allow appeal of all other orders or rulings made by the trial court in the course of the case.
this is because such orders cannot be appealed "as of right".
there are two distinct forms of appellate review, "direct" and "collateral".
generally speaking, "[d]irect appeal statutes afford defendants the opportunity to challenge the merits of a judgment and allege errors of law or fact.
"graham v. borgen", 483 f 3d.
475 (7th cir.
2007) (no.
04-4103) (slip op.
at 7) (citation omitted).
in anglo-american common law courts, appellate review of lower court decisions may also be obtained by filing a petition for review by prerogative writ in certain cases.
after exhausting the first appeal as of right, defendants usually petition the highest state court to review the decision.
this appeal is known as a direct appeal.
the highest state court, generally known as the supreme court, exercises discretion over whether it will review the case.
on direct appeal, a prisoner challenges the grounds of the conviction based on an error that occurred at trial or some other stage in the adjudicative process.
an appellant's claim(s) must usually be preserved at trial.
this means that the defendant had to object to the error when it occurred in the trial.
because constitutional claims are of great magnitude, appellate courts might be more lenient to review the claim even if it was not preserved.
all states have a post-conviction relief process.
similar to federal post-conviction relief, an appellant can petition the court to correct alleged fundamental errors that were not corrected on direct review.
typical claims might include ineffective assistance of counsel and actual innocence based on new evidence.
these proceedings are normally separate from the direct appeal, however some states allow for collateral relief to be sought on direct appeal.
after direct appeal, the conviction is considered final.
an appeal from the post conviction court proceeds just as a direct appeal.
that is, it goes to the intermediate appellate court, followed by the highest court.
if the petition is granted the appellant could be released from incarceration, the sentence could be modified, or a new trial could be ordered.
a "notice of appeal" is a form or document that in many cases is required to begin an appeal.
the form is completed by the appellant or by the appellant's legal representative.
the nature of this form can vary greatly from country to country and from court to court within a country.
the specific rules of the legal system will dictate exactly how the appeal is officially begun.
some courts have samples of a notice of appeal on the court's own web site.
the deadline for beginning an appeal can often be very short: traditionally, it is measured in days, not months.
this can vary from country to country, as well as within a country, depending on the specific rules in force.
if the appellate court finds no defect, it "affirms" the judgment.
another situation is where appeal is by way of "re-hearing".
certain jurisdictions permit certain appeals to cause the trial to be heard afresh in the appellate court.
(this would happen, for example, if the appellant waited too long, under the appellate court's rules, to file the appeal.)
in other systems, the appellate court will normally consider the record of the lower court.
in those cases the record will first be certified by the lower court.
the appellant has the opportunity to present arguments for the granting of the appeal and the appellee (or respondent) can present arguments against it.
those arguments are presented in written briefs and sometimes in oral argument to the court at a hearing.
in an adversarial system, appellate courts do not have the power to review lower court decisions unless a party appeals it.
the united states legal system generally recognizes two types of appeals: a trial "de novo" or an appeal on the record.
if unchallenged, these decisions have the power to settle more minor legal disputes once and for all.
sometimes, however, the decision of the lower proceeding is itself admissible as evidence, thus helping to curb frivolous appeals.
in some cases, an application for "trial de novo" effectively erases the prior trial as if it had never taken place.
"[a] trial on the same charges in the circuit court does not violate double jeopardy principles, .
each seeks to prove to the higher court that the result they desired was the just result.
precedent and case law figure prominently in the arguments.
in cases where a judge rather than a jury decided issues of fact, an appellate court will apply an "abuse of discretion" standard of review.
this is usually defined as a decision outside the bounds of reasonableness.
in the case of new evidence, there must be a high probability that its presence or absence would have made a material difference in the trial.
another issue suitable for appeal in criminal cases is effective assistance of counsel.
a lawyer traditionally starts an oral argument to any appellate court with the words "may it please the court."
the mandate is distinguished from the appeal court's opinion, which sets out the legal reasoning for its decision.
in some jurisdictions the mandate is known as the "remittitur".
remand is not required where there is nothing left to do in the case.
some reviewing courts who have discretionary review may send a case back without comment other than "review improvidently granted".
in other words, after looking at the case, they chose not to say anything.
the result for the case of "review improvidently granted" is effectively the same as affirmed, but without that extra higher court stamp of approval.
in a criminal case, there is usually an arraignment or some other kind of appearance before the defendant comes to court.
the pleading in the criminal case, which is entered on the record in open court, is usually either guilty or not guilty.
generally speaking in private, civil cases there is no plea entered of guilt or innocence.
there is only a judgment that grants money damages or some other kind of equitable remedy such as restitution or a permanent injunction.
criminal cases may lead to fines or other punishment, such as imprisonment.
a jurisdiction's supreme court is that jurisdiction's highest appellate court.
appellate courts nationwide can operate under varying rules.
the authority of appellate courts to review the decisions of lower courts varies widely from one jurisdiction to another.
in some areas, the appellate court has limited powers of review.
while in many appellate courts have jurisdiction over all cases decided by lower courts, some systems have appellate courts divided by the type of jurisdiction they exercise.
in the united states, alabama, tennessee, and oklahoma also have separate courts of criminal appeals.
court of criminal appeals include: the court of appeal of new zealand, located in wellington, is new zealand's principal intermediate appellate court.
in practice, most appeals are resolved at this intermediate appellate level, rather than in the supreme court.
the court of appeal of sri lanka, located in colombo, is the second senior court in the sri lankan legal system.
furthermore, u.s. appellate courts are usually restricted to hearing appeals based on matters that were originally brought up before the trial court.
in most u.s. states, and in u.s. federal courts, parties before the court are allowed one appeal as of right.
this means that a party who is unsatisfied with the outcome of a trial may bring an appeal to contest that outcome.
however, appeals may be costly, and the appellate court must find an error on the part of the court below that justifies upsetting the verdict.
therefore, only a small proportion of trial court decisions result in appeals.
many u.s. jurisdictions title their appellate court a court of appeal or court of appeals.
in some jurisdictions, a court able to hear appeals is known as an appellate division.
the phrase "court of appeals" most often refers to intermediate appellate courts.
however, the maryland and new york systems are different.
the maryland court of appeals and the new york court of appeals are the highest appellate courts in those states.
the new york supreme court is a trial court of general jurisdiction.
depending on the system, certain courts may serve as both trial courts and appellate courts, hearing appeals of decisions made by courts with more limited jurisdiction.
arraignment is a formal reading of a criminal charging document in the presence of the defendant, to inform him of the charges against the defendant.
in response to arraignment, the accused is expected to enter a plea.
pleas of "nolo contendere" (no contest) and the ""alford" plea" are allowed in some circumstances.
in australia, arraignment is the first of eleven stages in a criminal trial, and involves the clerk of the court reading out the indictment.
the judge will testify during the indictment process.
in every province in canada except british columbia, defendants are arraigned on the day of their trial.
in british columbia, arraignment takes place in one of the first few court appearances by the defendant or their lawyer.
the defendant is asked whether he or she pleads guilty or not guilty to each charge.
in france, the general rule is that one cannot remain in police custody for more than 24 hours from the time of the arrest.
the police needs to have the consent of the prosecutor (in the vast majority of cases, the prosecutor will consent).
at the first appearance, the accused is read the charges and asked for a plea.
the available pleas are, guilty, not guilty, and no plea.
no plea allows the defendant to get legal advice on the plea, which must be made on the second appearance.
his plea having been entered he is said to stand arraigned.
if they are not released after being charged, they should be brought before a court as soon as practicable.
he/she shall be given a copy of the indictment [...] before he/she is called upon to plead."
in federal courts, arraignment takes place in two stages.
during this arraignment the defendant is informed of the pending legal charges and is informed of his or her right to retain counsel.
the presiding judge also decides at what amount, if any, to set bail.
during the second arraignment, a post-indictment arraignment (pia), the defendant is allowed to enter a plea.
in new york, most people arrested must be released if they are not arraigned within 24 hours.
in california, arraignments must be conducted without unnecessary delay and, in any event, within 48 hours of arrest, excluding weekends and holidays.
the wording of the arraignment varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
however, it generally conforms with the following principles: video arraignment is the act of conducting the arraignment process using some form of videoconferencing technology.
use of the video arraignment process addresses the problems associated with having to transport defendants.
it also addresses the rising costs of transportation.
if the defendant pleads guilty, an evidentiary hearing usually follows.
the court is not required to accept a guilty plea.
during the hearing, the judge assesses the offense, the mitigating factors, and the defendant's character, and passes sentence.
if the defendant pleads not guilty, a date is set for a preliminary hearing or a trial.
today in common-law jurisdictions, the court enters a plea of not guilty for a defendant who refuses to enter a plea.
the rationale for this is the defendant's right to silence.
this is also often the stage at which arguments for or against pre-trial release and bail may be made, depending on the alleged crime and jurisdiction.
"america the beautiful" is an american patriotic song.
the lyrics were written by katharine lee bates, and the music was composed by church organist and choirmaster samuel a.
ward at grace episcopal church in newark, new jersey.
the two never met.
at that time, the poem was titled "america" for publication.
ward's music combined with the bates poem was first published in 1910 and titled "america the beautiful".
the song is one of the most popular of the many u.s. patriotic songs.
the poem was initially published two years later in "the congregationalist" to commemorate the fourth of july.
it quickly caught the public's fancy.
an amended version was published in 1904.
the first known melody written for the song was sent in by silas pratt when the poem was published in "the congregationalist".
by 1900, at least 75 different melodies had been written.
a hymn tune composed in 1882 by samuel a.
just as bates had been inspired to write her poem, ward, too, was inspired.
he composed the tune for the old hymn "o mother dear, jerusalem", retitling the work "materna".
ward's music combined with bates's poem were first published together in 1910 and titled "america the beautiful".
ward died in 1903, not knowing the national stature his music would attain.
bates was more fortunate, since the song's popularity was well established by the time of her death in 1929.
it is included in songbooks in many religious congregations in the united states.
bing crosby included the song in a medley on his album "101 gang songs" (1961).
frank sinatra recorded the song with nelson riddle during the sessions for "the concert sinatra" in february 1963, for a projected 45 single release.
three different renditions of the song have entered the hot country songs charts.
the first was by charlie rich, which went to number 22 in 1976.
a second, by mickey newbury, peaked at number 82 in 1980.
the song re-entered the chart following the september 11 attacks.
for super bowl xlviii, the coca-cola company aired a multilingual version of the song, sung in several different languages.
the commercial received some criticism on social media sites, such as twitter and facebook, and from some conservatives, such as glenn beck.
other songs that have used this phrase include the american patriotic song "god bless the u.s.a." and schoolhouse rock's "elbow room".
the phrase and the song are also the namesake of the shining sea bikeway, a bike path in bates's hometown of falmouth, massachusetts.
the phrase is similar to the latin phrase """" ("from sea to sea"), which is the official motto of canada.
"purple mountain majesties" refers to the shade of the pikes peak in colorado springs, colorado, which inspired bates to write the poem.
lynn sherr's 2001 book "america the beautiful" discusses the origins of the song and the backgrounds of its authors in depth.
the book points out that the poem has the same meter as that of "auld lang syne"; the songs can be sung interchangeably.
additionally, sherr discusses the evolution of the lyrics, for instance, changes to the original third verse written by bates.
